::I::
FRom faireﬅ creatures we deſire increaſe,
That thereby beauties Roſe might neuer die,
But as the riper ſhould by time deceaſe,
His tender heire might beare his memory:
But thou contracted to thine owne bright eyes,
Feed'ﬅ thy lights ﬂame with ſelfe ſubﬅantiall fewell,
Making a famine where aboundance lies,
Thy ſelfe thy foe, to thy ſweet ſelfe too cruell:
Thou that art now the worlds freſh ornament,
And only herauld to the gaudy ſpring,
Within thine owne bud burieﬅ thy content,
And tender chorle makﬅ waﬅ in niggarding:
Pitty the world, or elſe this glutton be,
To eate the worlds due, by the graue and thee.

::II::
VVHen fortie Winters ſhall beſeige thy brow,
And digge deep trenches in thy beauties ﬁeld,
Thy youthes proud liuery ſo gaz'd on now,
Wil be a totter'd weed of ſmal worth held:
Then being aſkt, where all thy beautie lies,
Where all the treaſure of thy luﬅy daies;
To ſay within thine owne deepe ſunken eyes,
Were an all-eating ſhame, and thriftleſſe praiſe.
How much more praiſe deſeru'd thy beauties vſe,
If thou couldﬅ anſwere this faire child of mine
Shall ſum my count, and make my old excuſe
Proouing his beautie by ſucceſſion thine.
This were to be new made when thou art ould,
And ſee thy blood warme when thou feel'ﬅ it could,

::III::
LOoke in thy glaſſe and tell the face thou veweﬅ,
Now is the time that face ſhould forme an other,
Whoſe freſh repaire if now thou not reneweﬅ,
Thou doo'ﬅ beguile the world, vnbleſſe ſome mother.
For where is ſhe ſo faire whoſe vn-eard wombe
Diſdaines the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he ſo fond will be the tombe,
Of his ſelfe loue to ﬅop poﬅerity?
Thou art thy mothers glaſſe and ſhe in thee
Calls backe the louely Aprill of her prime,
So thou through windowes of thine age ſhalt ſee,
Diſpight of wrinkles this thy goulden time.
But if thou liue remembred not to be,
Die ſingle and thine Image dies with thee.

::IV::
VNthrifty louelineſſe why doﬅ thou ſpend,
Vpon thy ſelfe thy beauties legacy?
Natures bequeﬅ giues nothing but doth lend,
And being franck ſhe lends to thoſe are free:
Then beautious nigard why dooﬅ thou abuſe,
The bountious largeſſe giuen thee to giue?
Proﬁtles vſerer why dooﬅ thou vſe
So great a ſumme of ſummes yet can'ﬅ not liue?
For hauing traﬃke with thy ſelfe alone,
Thou of thy ſelfe thy ſweet ſelfe doﬅ deceaue,
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
What acceptable Audit can'ﬅ thou leaue?
Thy vnuſ'd beauty muﬅ be tomb'd with thee,
Which vſed liues th'executor to be.

::V::
THoſe howers that with gentle worke did frame,
The louely gaze where euery eye doth dwell
Will play the tirants to the very ſame,
And that vnfaire which fairely doth excell:
For neuer reﬅing time leads Summer on,
To hidious winter and confounds him there,
Sap checkt with froﬅ and luﬅie leau's quite gon.
Beauty ore-ſnow'd and barenes euery where,
Then were not ſummers diﬅillation left
A liquid priſoner pent in walls of glaſſe,
Beauties eﬀect with beauty were bereft,
Nor it nor noe remembrance what it was.
But ﬂowers diﬅil'd though they with winter meete,
Leeſe but their ſhow, their ſubﬅance ﬅill liues ſweet.

::VI::
THen let not winters wragged hand deface,
In thee thy ſummer ere thou be diﬅil'd:
Make ſweet ſome viall;treaſure thou ſome place,
With beautits treaſure ere it be ſelfe kil'd:
That vſe is not forbidden vſery,
Which happies thoſe that pay the willing lone;
That's for thy ſelfe to breed an other thee,
Or ten times happier be it ten for one,
Ten times thy ſelfe were happier then thou art,
If ten of thine ten times reﬁgur'd thee,
Then what could death doe if thou ſhould'ﬅ depart,
Leauing thee liuing in poﬅerity?
Be not ſelfe-wild for thou art much too faire,
To be deaths conqueﬅ and make wormes thine heire.

::VII::
LOe in the Orient when the gracious light,
Lifts vp his burning head, each vnder eye
Doth homage to his new appearing ſight,
Seruing with lookes his ſacred maieﬅy,
And hauing climb'd the ﬅeepe vp heauenly hill,
Reſembling ﬅrong youth in his middle age,
Yet mortall lookes adore his beauty ﬅill,
Attending on his goulden pilgrimage:
But when from high-moﬅ pich with wery car,
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
The eyes(fore dutious)now conuerted are
From his low tract and looke an other way:
So thou, thy ſelfe out-going in thy noon:
Vnlok'd on dieﬅ vnleſſe thou get a ſonne.

::VIII::
MVſick to heare, why hear'ﬅ thou muſick ſadly,
Sweets with ſweets warre not , ioy delights in ioy:
Why lou'ﬅ thou that which thou receauﬅ not gladly,
Or elſe receau'ﬅ with pleaſure thine annoy ?
If the true concord of well tuned ſounds,
By vnions married do oﬀend thine eare,
They do but ſweetly chide thee , who confounds
In ſingleneſſe the parts that thou ſhould'ﬅ beare:
Marke how one ﬅring ſweet husband to an other,
Strikes each in each by mutuall ordering;
Reſembling ſier, and child, and happy mother,
Who all in one, one pleaſing note do ſing:
Whoſe ſpeechleſſe ſong being many, ſeeming one,
Sings this to thee thou ſingle wilt proue none.

::IX::
IS it for feare to wet a widdowes eye,
That thou conſum'ﬅ thy ſelfe in ſingle life?
Ah;if thou iſſuleſſe ſhalt hap to die,
The world will waile thee like a makeleſſe wife,
The world wilbe thy widdow and ﬅill weepe,
That thou no forme of thee haﬅ left behind ,
When euery priuat widdow well may keepe,
By childrens eyes, her husbands ſhape in minde:
Looke what an vnthrift in the world doth ſpend
Shifts but his place, for ﬅill the world inioyes it
But beauties waﬅe hath in the world an end,
And kept vnvſde the vſer ſo deﬅroyes it:
No loue toward others in that boſome ſits
That on himſelfe ſuch murdrous ſhame commits.

::X::
FOr ſhame deny that thou bear'ﬅ loue to any
Who for thy ſelfe art ſo vnprouident
Graunt if thou wilt, thou art belou'd of many,
But that thou none lou'ﬅ is moﬅ euident:
For thou art ſo poſſeﬅ with murdrous hate,
That gainﬅ thy ſelfe thou ﬅickﬅ not to conſpire,
Seeking that beautious roofe to ruinate
Which to repaire ſhould be thy chiefe deſire :
O change thy thought, that I may change my minde,
Shall hate be fairer log'd then gentle loue?
Be as thy preſence is gracious and kind,
Or to thy ſelfe at leaﬅ kind harted proue,
Make thee an other ſelfe for loue of me,
That beauty ﬅill may liue in thine or thee.

::XI::
AS faﬅ as thou ſhalt wane ſo faﬅ thou grow'ﬅ,
In one of thine, from that which thou departeﬅ,
And that freſh bloud which yongly thou beﬅow'ﬅ,
Thou maiﬅ call thine, when thou from youth conuerteﬅ,
Herein liues wiſdome, beauty, and increaſe,
Without this follie, age, and could decay,
If all were minded ſo, the times ſhould ceaſe,
And threeſcoore yeare would make the world away:
Let thoſe whom nature hath not made for ﬅore,
Harſh, featureleſſe, and rude , barrenly perriſh,
Looke whom ſhe beﬅ indow'd, ſhe gaue the more;
Which bountious guift thou ſhouldﬅ in bounty cherriſh,
She caru'd thee for her ſeale, and ment therby,
Thou ſhouldﬅ print more, not let that coppy die.

::XII::
VVHen I doe count the clock that tels the time,
And ſee the braue day ſunck in hidious night,
When I behold the violet paﬅ prime,
And ſable curls or ſiluer'd ore with white :
When lofty trees I ſee barren of leaues,
Which erﬅ from heat did canopie the herd
And Sommers greene all girded vp in ſheaues
Borne on the beare with white and briﬅly beard:
Then of thy beauty do I queﬅion make
That thou among the waﬅes of time muﬅ goe,
Since ſweets and beauties do them-ſelues forſake,
And die as faﬅ as they ſee others grow,
And nothing gainﬅ Times ſieth can make defence
Saue breed to braue him, when he takes thee hence.

::XIII::
O That you were your ſelfe, but loue you are
No longer yours, then you your ſelfe here liue,
Againﬅ this cumming end you ſhould prepare,
And your ſweet ſemblance to ſome other giue.
So ſhould that beauty which you hold in leaſe
Find no determination, then you were
You ſelfe again after your ſelfes deceaſe,
When your ſweet iſſue your ſweet forme ſhould beare.
Who lets ſo faire a houſe fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honour might vphold,
Againﬅ the ﬅormy guﬅs of winters day
And barren rage of deaths eternall cold?
O none but vnthrifts, deare my loue you know,
You had a Father, let your Son ſay ſo.

::XIV::
NOt from the ﬅars do I my iudgement plucke,
And yet me thinkes I haue Aﬅronomy,
But not to tell of good, or euil lucke,
Of plagues, of dearths, or ſeaſons quallity,
Nor can I fortune to breefe mynuits tell;
Pointing to each his thunder, raine and winde,
Or ſay with Princes if it ſhal go wel
By oft predict that I in heauen ﬁnde.
But from thine eies my knowledge I deriue,
And conﬅant ﬅars in them I read ſuch art
As truth and beautie ſhal together thriue
If from thy ſelfe, to ﬅore thou wouldﬅ conuert:
Or elſe of thee this I prognoﬅicate,
Thy end is Truthes and Beauties doome and date.

::XV::
WHen I conſider euery thing that growes
Holds in perfection but a little moment.
That this huge ﬅage preſenteth nought but ſhowes
Whereon the Stars in ſecret inﬂuence comment.
When I perceiue that men as plants increaſe,
Cheared and checkt euen by the ſelfe-ſame skie:
Vaunt in their youthfull ſap, at height decreaſe,
And were their braue ﬅate out of memory.
Then the conceit of this inconﬅant ﬅay,
Sets you moﬅ rich in youth before my ſight,
Where waﬅfull time debateth with decay
To change your day of youth to ſullied night,
And all in war with Time for loue of you
As he takes from you, I ingraft you new.

::XVI::
BVt wherefore do not you a mightier waie
Make warre vppon this bloudie tirant time?
And fortiﬁe your ſelfe in your decay
With meanes more bleſſed then my barren rime?
Now ﬅand you on the top of happie houres,
And many maiden gardens yet vnſet,
With vertuous wiſh would beare your liuing ﬂowers,
Much liker then your painted counterfeit:
So ſhould the lines of life that life repaire
Which this (Times penſel or my pupill pen )
Neither in inward worth nor outward faire
Can make you liue your ſelfe in eies of men,
To giue away your ſelfe, keeps your ſelfe ﬅill,
And you muﬅ liue drawne by your owne ſweet skill,

::XVII::
VVHo will beleeue my verſe in time to come
If it were ﬁld with your moﬅ high deſerts?
Though yet heauen knowes it is but as a tombe
Which hides your life , and ſhewes not halfe your parts:
If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
And in freſh numbers number all your graces,
The age to come would ſay this Poet lies,
Such heauenly touches nere toucht earthly faces.
So ſhould my papers (yellowed with their age)
Be ſcorn'd, like old men of leſſe truth then tongue,
And your true rights be termd a Poets rage,
And ﬅretched miter of an Antique ſong.
But were ſome childe of yours aliue that time,
You ſhould liue twiſe in it, and in my rime.

::XVIII::
SHall I compare thee to a Summers day?
Thou art more louely and more temperate:
Rough windes do ſhake the darling buds of Maie,
And Sommers leaſe hath all too ſhort a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heauen ſhines,
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
And euery faire from faire ſome-time declines,
By chance, or natures changing courſe vntrim'd:
But thy eternall Sommer ſhall not fade,
Nor looſe poſſeſſion of that faire thou ow'ﬅ,
Nor ſhall death brag thou wandr'ﬅ in his ſhade,
When in eternall lines to time thou grow'ﬅ,
So long as men can breath or eyes can ſee,
So long liues this, and this giues life to thee,

::XIX::
DEuouring time blunt thou the Lyons pawes,
And make the earth deuoure her owne ſweet brood,
Plucke the keene teeth from the ﬁerce Tygers yawes,
And burne the long liu'd Phænix in her blood,
Make glad and ſorry ſeaſons as thou ﬂeet'ﬅ,
And do what ere thou wilt ſwift-footed time
To the wide world and all her fading ſweets:
But I forbid thee one moﬅ hainous crime,
O carue not with thy howers my loues faire brow,
Nor draw noe lines there with thine antique pen,
Him in thy courſe vntainted doe allow,
For beauties patterne to ſucceding men.
Yet doe thy worﬅ ould Time diſpight thy wrong,
My loue ſhall in my verſe euer liue young.

::XX::
A Womans face with natures owne hand painted,
Haﬅe thou the Maﬅer Miﬅris of my paſſion,
A womans gentle hart but not acquainted
With ſhifting change as is falſe womens faſhion,
An eye more bright then theirs, leſſe falſe in rowling:
Gilding the obiect where-vpon it gazeth,
A man in hew all Hews in his controwling,
Which ﬅeales mens eyes and womens ſoules amaſeth.
And for a woman wert thou ﬁrﬅ created,
Till nature as ſhe wrought thee fell a dotinge,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpoſe nothing.
But ſince ſhe prickt thee out for womens pleaſure,
Mine be thy loue and thy loues vſe their treaſure.

::XXI::
SO is it not with me as with that Muſe,
Stird by a painted beauty to his verſe,
Who heauen it ſelfe for ornament doth vſe,
And euery faire with his faire doth reherſe,
Making a coopelment of proud compare
With Sunne and Moone, with earth and ſeas rich gems:
With Aprills ﬁrﬅ borne ﬂowers and all things rare,
That heauens ayre in this huge rondure hems,
O let me true in loue but truly write,
And then beleeue me, my loue is as faire,
As any mothers childe, though not ſo bright
As thoſe gould candells ﬁxt in heauens ayer:
Let them ſay more that like of heare-ſay well,
I will not prayſe that purpoſe not to ſell.

::XXII::
MY glaſſe ſhall not perſwade me I am ould,
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
But when in thee times forrwes I behould,
Then look I death my daies ſhould expiate.
For all that beauty that doth couer thee,
Is but the ſeemely rayment of my heart,
Which in thy breﬅ doth liue, as thine in me,
How can I then be elder then thou art?
O therefore loue be of thy ſelfe ſo wary,
As I not for my ſelfe, but for thee will,
Bearing thy heart which I will keepe ſo chary
As tender nurſe her babe from faring ill,
Preſume not on thy heart when mine is ſlaine,
Thou gau'ﬅ me thine not to giue backe againe.

::XXIII::
AS an vnperfect actor on the ﬅage,
Who with his feare is put beſides his part,
Or ſome ﬁerce thing repleat with too much rage,
Whoſe ﬅrengths abondance weakens his owne heart;
So I for feare of truﬅ, forget to ſay,
The perfect ceremony of loues right,
And in mine owne loues ﬅrength ſeeme to decay,
Ore-charg'd with burthen of mine owne loues might:
O let my books be then the eloquence,
And domb preſagers of my ſpeaking breﬅ,
Who pleade for loue, and look for recompence,
More then that tonge that more hath more expreﬅ.
O learne to read what ſilent loue hath writ,
To heare wit eies belongs to loues ﬁne wiht.

::XXIV::
MIne eye hath play'd the painter and hath ﬅeeld,
Thy beauties forme in table of my heart,
My body is the frame wherein ti's held,
And perſpectiue it is beﬅ Painters art.
For through the Painter muﬅ you ſee his skill,
To ﬁnde where your true Image pictur'd lies,
Which in my boſomes ſhop is hanging ﬅil,
That hath his windowes glazed with thine eyes:
Now ſee what good-turnes eyes for eies haue done,
Mine eyes haue drawne thy ſhape, and thine for me
Are windowes to my breﬅ, where-through the Sun
Delights to peepe, to gaze therein on thee
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art
They draw but what they ſee, know not the hart.

::XXV::
LEt thoſe who are in fauor with their ﬅars,
Of publike honour and proud titles boﬅ,
Whilﬅ I whome fortune of ſuch tryumph bars
Vnlookt for ioy in that I honour moﬅ;
Great Princes fauorites their faire leaues ſpread,
But as the Marygold at the ſuns eye,
And in them-ſelues their pride lies buried,
For at a frowne they in their glory die.
The painefull warrier famoſed for worth,
After a thouſand victories once foild,
Is from the booke of honour raſed quite,
And all the reﬅ forgot for which he toild:
Then happy I that loue and am beloued
Where I may not remoue, nor be remoued.

::XXVI::
LOrd of my loue, to whome in vaſſalage
Thy merrit hath my dutie ﬅrongly knit;
To thee I ſend this written ambaſſage
To witneſſe duty, not to ſhew my wit.
Duty ſo great, which wit ſo poore as mine
May make ſeeme bare, in wanting words to ſhew it;
But that I hope ſome good conceipt of thine
In thy ſoules thought(all naked) will beﬅow it:
Til whatſoeuer ﬅar that guides my mouing,
Points on me gratiouſly with faire aſpect,
And puts apparrell on my tottered louing,
To ſhow me worthy of their ſweet reſpect,
Then may I dare to boaﬅ how I doe loue thee,
Til then, not ſhow my head where thou maiﬅ proue me

::XXVII::
WEary with toyle, I haﬅ me to my bed ,
The deare repoſe for lims with trauaill tired,
But then begins a iourny in my head
To worke my mind, when boddies work's expired.
For then my thoughts(from far where I abide)
Intend a zelous pilgrimage to thee;
And keepe my drooping eye-lids open wide,
Looking on darknes which the blind doe ſee.
Saue that my ſoules imaginary ſight
Preſents their ſhaddoe to my ſightles view,
Which like a iewell(hunge in gaﬅly night)
Makes blacke night beautious, and her old face new.
Loe thus by day my lims, by night my mind,
For thee, and for my ſelfe, noe quiet ﬁnde.

::XXVIII::
HOw can I then returne in happy plight
That am debard the beniﬁt of reﬅ?
When daies oppreſſion is not eazd by night,
But day by night and night by day opreﬅ.
And each(though enimes to ethers raigne)
Doe in conſent ſhake hands to torture me,
The one by toyle, the other to complaine
How far I toyle, ﬅill farther oﬀ from thee.
I tell the Day to pleaſe him thou art bright,
And do'ﬅ him grace when clouds doe blot the heauen:
So ﬂatter I the ſwart complexiond night,
When ſparkling ﬅars twire not thou guil'ﬅ th' eauen.
But day doth daily draw my ſorrowes longer,
And night doth nightly make greefes length ſeeme ﬅronger

::XXIX::
VVHen in diſgrace with Fortune and mens eyes,
I all alone beweepe my out-caﬅ ﬅate,
And trouble deafe heauen with my bootleſſe cries,
And looke vpon my ſelfe and curſe my fate.
Wiſhing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featur'd like him, like him with friends poſſeﬅ,
Deſiring this mans art, and that mans skope,
With what I moﬅ inioy contented leaﬅ,
Yet in theſe thoughts my ſelfe almoﬅ deſpiſing,
Haplye I thinke on thee, and then my ﬅate,
(Like to the Larke at breake of daye ariſing)
From ſullen earth ſings himns at Heauens gate,
For thy ſweet loue remembred ſuch welth brings,
That then I skorne to change my ﬅate with Kings.

::XXX::
VVHen to the Seſſions of ſweet ſilent thought,
I ſommon vp remembrance of things paﬅ,
I ſigh the lacke of many a thing I ſought,
And with old woes new waile my deare times waﬅe:
Then can I drowne an eye(vn-vſ'd to ﬂow)
For precious friends hid in deaths dateles night,
And weepe a freſh loues long ſince canceld woe,
And mone th'expence of many a vanniſht ſight.
Then can I greeue at greeuances fore-gon,
And heauily from woe to woe tell ore
The ſad account of fore-bemoned mone,
Which I new pay, as if not payd before.
But if the while I thinke on thee (deare friend)
All loſſes are reﬅord, and ſorrowes end.

::XXXI::
Thy boſome is indeared with all hearts,
Which I by lacking haue ſuppoſed dead,
And there raignes Loue and all Loues louing parts,
And all thoſe friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obſequious teare
Hath deare religious loue ﬅolne from mine eye,
As intereﬅ of the dead, which now appeare,
But things remou'd that hidden in there lie.
Thou art the graue where buried loue doth liue,
Hung with the tropheis of my louers gon,
Who all their parts of me to thee did giue,
That due of many, now is thine alone.
Their images I lou'd, I view in thee,
And thou(all they)haﬅ all the all of me.

::XXXII::
IF thou ſuruiue my well contented daie,
When that churle death my bones with duﬅ ſhall couer
And ſhalt by fortune once more re-ſuruay:
Theſe poore rude lines of thy deceaſed Louer:
Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
And though they be out-ﬅript by euery pen,
Reſerue them for my loue, not for their rime,
Exceeded by the hight of happier men.
Oh then voutſafe me but this louing thought,
Had my friends Muſe growne with this growing age,
A dearer birth then this his loue had brought
To march in ranckes of better equipage:
But ſince he died and Poets better proue,
Theirs for their ﬅile ile read, his for his loue.

::XXXIII::
FVll many a glorious morning haue I ſeene,
Flatter the mountaine tops with ſoueraine eie,
Kiſſing with golden face the meddowes greene;
Guilding pale ﬅreames with heauenly alcumy:
Anon permit the baſeﬅ cloudes to ride,
With ougly rack on his celeﬅiall face,
And from the for-lorne world his viſage hide
Stealing vnſeene to weﬅ with this diſgrace:
Euen ſo my Sunne one early morne did ſhine,
With all triumphant ſplendor on my brow,
But out alack, he was but one houre mine,
The region cloude hath mask'd him from me now.
Yet him for this, my loue no whit diſdaineth,
Suns of the world may ﬅaine, whē heauens ſun ﬅainteh.

::XXXIV::
VVHy didﬅ thou promiſe ſuch a beautious day,
And make me trauaile forth without my cloake,
To let bace cloudes ore-take me in my way,
Hiding thy brau'ry in their rotten ſmoke.
Tis not enough that through the cloude thou breake,
To dry the raine on my ﬅorme-beaten face,
For no man well of ſuch a ſalue can ſpeake,
That heales the wound, and cures not the diſgrace:
Nor can thy ſhame giue phiſicke to my griefe,
Though thou repent , yet I haue ﬅill the loſſe,
Th'oﬀenders ſorrow lends but weake reliefe
To him that beares the ﬅrong oﬀenſes loſſe.
Ah but thoſe teares are pearle which thy loue ſheeds,
And they are ritch, and ranſome all ill deeds.

::XXXV::
NO more bee greeu'd at that which thou haﬅ done,
Roſes haue thornes, and ſiluer fountaines mud,
Cloudes and eclipſes ﬅaine both Moone and Sunne,
And loathſome canker liues in ſweeteﬅ bud.
All men make faults, and euen I in this,
Authorizing thy treſpas with compare,
My ſelfe corrupting ſaluing thy amiſſe,
Excuſing their ſins more then their ſins are:
For to thy ſenſuall fault I bring in ſence,
Thy aduerſe party is thy Aduocate,
And gainﬅ my ſelfe a lawfull plea commence,
Such ciuill war is in my loue and hate,
That I an acceſſary needs muﬅ be,
To that ſweet theefe which ſourely robs from me,

::XXXVI::
LEt me confeſſe that we two muﬅ be twaine,
Although our vndeuided loues are one:
So ſhall thoſe blots that do with me remaine,
Without thy helpe , by me be borne alone.
In our two loues there is but one reſpect,
Though in our liues a ſeperable ſpight,
Which though it alter not loues ſole eﬀect,
Yet doth it ﬅeale ſweet houres from loues delight,
I may not euer-more acknowledge thee,
Leaﬅ my bewailed guilt ſhould do thee ſhame,
Nor thou with publike kindneſſe honour me,
Vnleſſe thou take that honour from thy name:
But doe not ſo, I loue thee in ſuch ſort,
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

::XXXVII::
AS a decrepit father takes delight,
To ſee his actiue childe do deeds of youth,
So I , made lame by Fortunes deareﬅ ſpight
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of theſe all, or all, or more
Intitled in their parts, do crowned ſit,
I make my loue ingrafted to this ﬅore:
So then I am not lame, poore, nor diſpiſ'd,
Whilﬅ that this ſhadow doth ſuch ſubﬅance giue,
That I in thy abundance am ſuﬃc'd,
And by a part of all thy glory liue:
Looke what is beﬅ, that beﬅ I wiſh in thee,
This wiſh I haue, then ten times happy me.

::XXXVIII::
HOw can my Muſe want ſubiect to inuent
While thou doﬅ breath that poor'ﬅ into my verſe,
Thine owne ſweet argument, to excellent,
For euery vulgar paper to rehearſe:
Oh giue thy ſelfe the thankes if ought in me,
Worthy peruſal ﬅand againﬅ thy ſight,
For who's ſo dumbe that cannot write to thee,
When thou thy ſelfe doﬅ giue inuention light?
Be thou the tenth Muſe, ten times more in worth
Then thoſe old nine which rimers inuocate,
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Eternal numbers to out-liue long date.
If my ſlight Muſe doe pleaſe theſe curious daies,
The paine be mine, but thine ſhal be the praiſe.

::XXXIX::
OH how thy worth with manners may I ſinge,
When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine owne praiſe to mine owne ſelfe bring;
And what is't but mine owne when I praiſe thee,
Euen for this, let vs deuided liue,
And our deare loue looſe name of ſingle one,
That by this ſeperation I may giue:
That due to thee which thou deſeru'ﬅ alone:
Oh abſence what a torment wouldﬅ thou proue,
Were it not thy ſoure leiſure gaue ſweet leaue,
To entertaine the time with thoughts of loue,
VVhich time and thoughts ſo ſweetly doﬅ deceiue.
And that thou teacheﬅ how to make one twaine,
By praiſing him here who doth hence remaine.

::XL::
TAke all my loues, my loue, yea take them all,
What haﬅ thou then more then thou hadﬅ before?
No loue, my loue, that thou maiﬅ true loue call,
All mine was thine, before thou hadﬅ this more:
Then if for my loue, thou my loue receiueﬅ,
I cannot blame thee, for my loue thou vſeﬅ,
But yet be blam'd, if thou this ſelfe deceaueﬅ
B y wilfull taﬅe of what thy ſelfe refuſeﬅ.
I doe forgiue thy robb'rie gentle theefe
Although thou ﬅeale thee all my pouerty:
And yet loue knowes it is a greater griefe
To beare loues wrong, then hates knowne iniury.
Laſciuious grace, in whom all il wel ſhowes,
Kill me with ſpights yet we muﬅ not be foes.

::XLI::
THoſe pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
When I am ſome-time abſent from thy heart,
Thy beautie, and thy yeares full well beﬁts,
For ﬅill temptation followes where thou art.
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be wonne,
Beautious thou art, therefore to be aſſailed.
And when a woman woes, what womans ſonne,
Will ſourely leaue her till he haue preuailed.
Aye me, but yet thou mighﬅ my ſeate forbeare,
And chide thy beauty, and thy ﬅraying youth,
Who lead thee in their ryot euen there
Where thou art forﬅ to breake a two-fold truth:
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
Thine by thy beautie beeing falſe to me.

::XLII::
THat thou haﬅ her it is not all my griefe,
And yet it may be ſaid I lou'd her deerely,
That ſhe hath thee is of my wayling cheefe,
A loſſe in loue that touches me more neerely.
Louing oﬀendors thus I will excuſe yee,
Thou dooﬅ loue her, becauſe thou knowﬅ I loue her,
And for my ſake euen ſo doth ſhe abuſe me,
Suﬀring my friend for my ſake to approoue her,
If I looſe thee, my loſſe is my loues gaine,
And looſing her, my friend hath found that loſſe,
Both ﬁnde each other, and I looſe both twaine,
And both for my ſake lay on me this croſſe,
But here's the ioy, my friend and I are one,
Sweete ﬂattery, then ſhe loues but me alone.

::XLIII::
WHen moﬅ I winke then doe mine eyes beﬅ ſee,
For all the day they view things vnreſpected,
But when I ſleepe, in dreames they looke on thee,
And darkely bright, are bright in darke directed.
Then thou whoſe ſhaddow ſhaddowes doth make bright,
How would thy ſhadowes forme, forme happy ſhow,
To the cleere day with thy much cleerer light,
When to vn-ſeeing eyes thy ſhade ſhines ſo?
How would(I ſay)mine eyes be bleſſed made,
By looking on thee in the liuing day ?
When in dead night their faire imperfect ſhade,
Through heauy ſleepe on ſightleſſe eyes doth ﬅay?
All dayes are nights to ſee till I ſee thee,
And nights bright daies when dreams do ſhew thee me,

::XLIV::
IF the dull ſubﬅance of my ﬂeſh were thought,
Iniurious diﬅance ſhould not ﬅop my way,
For then diſpight of ſpace I would be brought,
From limits farre remote, where thou dooﬅ ﬅay,
No matter then although my foote did ﬅand
Vpon the fartheﬅ earth remoou'd from thee,
For nimble thought can iumpe both ſea and land,
As ſoone as thinke the place where he would be.
But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought
To leape large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But that ſo much of earth and water wrought,
I muﬅ attend, times leaſure with my mone.
Receiuing naughts by elements ſo ſloe,
But heauie teares, badges of eithers woe.

::XLV::
THe other two, ſlight ayre, and purging ﬁre,
Are both with thee, where euer I abide,
The ﬁrﬅ my thought, the other my deſire,
Theſe preſent abſent with ſwift motion ſlide.
For when theſe quicker Elements are gone
In tender Embaſſie of loue to thee,
My life being made of foure, with two alone,
Sinkes downe to death, oppreﬅ with melancholie.
Vntill liues compoſition be recured,
By thoſe ſwift meſſengers return'd from thee,
Who euen but now come back againe aſſured,
Of their faire health, recounting it to me.
This told, I ioy, but then no longer glad,
I ſend them back againe and ﬅraight grow ſad.

::XLVI::
MIne eye and heart are at a mortall warre,
How to deuide the conqueﬅ of thy ſight,
Mine eye, my heart their pictures ſight would barre,
My heart, mine eye the freeedome of that right,
My heart doth plead that thou in him dooﬅ lye,
(A cloſet neuer pearﬅ with chriﬅall eyes)
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
And ſayes in him their faire appearance lyes.
To ſide this title is impannelled
A queﬅ of thoughts, all tennants to the heart,
And by their verdict is determined
The cleere eyes moyitie, and the deare hearts part.
As thus, mine eyes due is their outward part,
And my hearts right, their inward loue of heart.

::XLVII::
BEtwixt mine eye and heart a league is tooke,
And each doth good turnes now vnto the other,
When that mine eye is famiſht for a looke,
Or heart in loue with ſighes himſelfe doth ſmother;
With my loues picture then my eye doth feaﬅ,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
An other time mine eye is my hearts gueﬅ,
And in his thoughts of loue doth ſhare a part.
So either by thy picture or my loue,
Thy selfe away, are preſent ﬅill with me,
For thou nor farther then my thoughts canﬅ moue,
And I am ﬅill with them, and they with thee.
Or if they ſleepe, thy picture in my ſight
Awakes my heart, to hearts and eyes delight.

::XLVIII::
HOw carefull was I when I tooke my way,
Each triﬂe vnder trueﬅ barres to thruﬅ,
That to my vſe it might vn-vſed ﬅay
From hands of falſehood, in ſure wards of truﬅ ?
But thou, to whom my iewels triﬂes are,
Moﬅ worthy comfort, now my greateﬅ griefe,
Thou beﬅ of deereﬅ, and mine onely care,
Art left the prey of euery vulgar theefe.
Thee haue I not lockt vp in any cheﬅ,
Saue where thou art not, though I feele thou art,
Within the gentle cloſure of my breﬅ,
From whence at pleaſure thou maiﬅ come and part,
And euen thence thou wilt be ﬅolne I feare,
For truth prooues theeuiſh for a prize ſo deare.

::XLIX::
AGainﬅ that time ( if euer that time come )
When I ſhall ſee thee frowne on my defects,
When as thy loue hath caﬅ his vtmoﬅ ſumme,
Cauld to that audite by aduiſ'd reſpects,
Againﬅ that time when thou ſhalt ﬅrangely paſſe,
And ſcarcely greete me with that ſunne thine eye,
When loue conuerted from the thing it was
Shall reaſons ﬁnde of ſetled grauitie.
Againﬅ that time do I inſconce me here
Within the knowledge of mine owne deſart,
And this my hand, againﬅ my ſelfe vpreare,
To guard the lawfull reaſons on thy part,
To leaue poore me, thou haﬅ the ﬅrength of lawes,
Since why to loue, I can alledge no cauſe.

::L::
HOw heauie doe I iourney on the way,
When what I ſeeke (my wearie trauels end)
Doth teach that eaſe and that repoſe to ſay
Thus farre the miles are meaſurde from thy friend.
The beaﬅ that beares me, tired with my woe,
Plods duly on, to beare that waight in me,
As if by ſome inﬅinct the wretch did know
His rider lou'd not ſpeed being made from thee:
The bloody ſpurre cannot prouoke him on,
That ſome-times anger thruﬅs into his hide,
Which heauily he anſwers with a grone,
More ſharpe to me then ſpurring to his ſide,
For that ſame grone doth put this in my mind,
My greefe lies onward and my ioy behind.

::LI::
THus can my loue excuſe the ſlow oﬀence,
Of my dull bearer, when from thee I ſpeed,
From where thou art, why ſhoulld I haﬅ me thence,
Till I returne of poﬅing is noe need.
O what excuſe will my poore beaﬅ then ﬁnd,
When ſwift extremity can ſeeme but ſlow,
Then ſhould I ſpurre though mounted on the wind,
In winged ſpeed no motion ſhall I know,
Then can no horſe with my deſire keepe pace,
Therefore deſire(of perfects loue being made)
Shall naigh noe dull ﬂeſh in his ﬁery race,
But loue, for loue, thus ſhall excuſe my iade,
Since from thee going, he went wilfull ſlow,
Towards thee ile run, and giue him leaue to goe.

::LII::
SO am I as the rich whoſe bleſſed key,
Can bring him to his ſweet vp-locked treaſure,
The which he will not eu'ry hower ſuruay,
For blunting the ﬁne point of ſeldome pleaſure.
Therefore are feaﬅs ſo ſollemne and ſo rare,
Since ſildom comming in the long yeare ſet,
Like ﬅones of worth they thinly placed are,
Or captaine Iewells in the carconet.
So is the time that keepes you as my cheﬅ,
Or as the ward-robe which the robe doth hide,
To make ſome ſpeciall inﬅant ſpeciall bleﬅ,
By new vnfoulding his impriſon'd pride.
Bleſſed are you whoſe worthineſſe giues skope,
Being had to tryumph, being lackt to hope.

::LIII::
VVHat is your ſubﬅance, whereof are you made,
That millions of ﬅrange ſhaddowes on you tend?
Since euery one, hath euery one, one ſhade,
And you but one, can euery ſhaddow lend:
Deſcribe Adonis and the counterfet,
Is poorely immitated after you,
On Hellens cheeke all art of beautie ſet,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Speake of the ſpring, and foyzon of the yeare,
The one doth ſhaddow of your beautie ſhow,
The other as your bountie doth appeare,
And you in euery bleſſed ſhape we know.
In all externall grace you haue ſome part,
But you like none, none you for conﬅant heart.

::LIV::
OH how much more doth beautie beautious ſeeme,
By that ſweet ornament which truth doth giue,
The Roſe lookes faire, but fairer we it deeme
For that ſweet odor, which doth in it liue:
The Canker bloomes haue full as deepe a die,
As the perfumed tincture of the Roſes,
Hang on ſuch thornes, and play as wantonly,
When ſommers breath their masked buds diſcloſes:
But for their virtue only is their ſhow,
They liue vnwoo'd, and vnreſpected fade,
Die to themſelues . Sweet Roſes doe not ſo,
Of their ſweet deathes, are ſweeteﬅ odors made:
And ſo of you, beautious and louely youth,
When that ſhall vade, by verſe diﬅils your truth.

::LV::
NOt marble, nor the guilded monument,
Of Princes ſhall out-liue this powrefull rime,
But you ſhall ſhine more bright in theſe contents
Then vnſwept ﬅone, beſmeer'd with ſluttiſh time.
When waﬅefull warre ſhall Statues ouer-turne,
And broiles roote out the worke of maſonry,
Nor Mars his ſword, nor warres quick ﬁre ſhall burne:
The liuing record of your memory.
Gainﬅ death, and all obliuious emnity
Shall you pace forth, your praiſe ſhall ﬅil ﬁnde roome,
Euen in the eyes of all poﬅerity
That weare this world out to the ending doome.
So til the iudgement that your ſelfe ariſe,
You liue in this, and dwell in louers eies.

::LVI::
Sweet loue renew thy force , be it not ſaid
Thy edge ſhould blunter be then apetite,
Which but too daie by feeding is alaied,
To morrow ſharpned in his former might.
So loue be thou, although too daie thou ﬁll
Thy hungrie eies, euen till they winck with fulneſſe,
Too morrow ſee againe, and doe not kill
The ſpirit of Loue, with a perpetual dulneſſe:
Let this ſad Intrim like the Ocean be
Which parts the ſhore, where two contracted new,
Come daily to the banckes, that when they ſee:
Returne of loue, more bleﬅ may be the view.
As cal it Winter, which being ful of care,
Makes Sōmers welcome, thrice more wiſh'd, more rare:

::LVII::
BEing your ſlaue what ſhould I doe but tend,
Vpon the houres, and times of your deſire?
I haue no precious time at al to ſpend;
Nor ſeruices to doe til you require.
Nor dare I chide the world without end houre,
Whilﬅ I(my ſoueraine)watch the clock for you,
Nor thinke the bitterneſſe of abſence ſowre,
VVhen you haue bid your ſeruant once adieue.
Nor dare I queﬅion with my iealious thought,
VVhere you may be, or your aﬀaires ſuppoſe,
But like a ſad ſlaue ﬅay and thinke of nought
Saue where you are , how happy you make thoſe.
So true a foole is loue, that in your Will,
(Though you doe any thing)he thinkes no ill.

::LVIII::
THat God forbid , that made me ﬁrﬅ your ſlaue,
I ſhould in thought controule your times of pleaſure,
Or at your hand th' account of houres to craue,
Being your vaſſail bound to ﬅaie your leiſure.
Oh let me ſuﬀer(being at your beck)
Th' impriſon'd abſence of your libertie,
And patience tame, to ſuﬀerance bide each check,
Without accuſing you of iniury.
Be where you liﬅ, your charter is ſo ﬅrong,
That you your ſelfe may priuiledge your time
To what you will, to you it doth belong,
Your ſelfe to pardon of ſelfe-doing crime.
I am to waite, though waiting ſo be hell,
Not blame your pleaſure be it ill or well.

::LIX::
IF their bee nothing new, but that which is,
Hath beene before , how are our braines beguild,
Which laboring for inuention beare amiſſe
The ſecond burthen of a former child ?
Oh that record could with a back-ward looke,
Euen of ﬁue hundreth courſes of the Sunne,
Show me your image in ſome antique booke,
Since minde at ﬁrﬅ in carrecter was done.
That I might ſee what the old world could ſay,
To this compoſed wonder of your frame,
Whether we are mended, or where better they,
Or whether reuolution be the ſame.
Oh ſure I am the wits of former daies,
To ſubiects worſe haue giuen admiring praiſe.

::LX::
LIke as the waues make towards the pibled ſhore,
So do our minuites haﬅen to their end,
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In ſequent toile all forwards do contend.
Natiuity once in the maine of light.
Crawles to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
Crooked eclipſes gainﬅ his glory ﬁght,
And time that gaue, doth now his gift confound.
Time doth tranſﬁxe the ﬂoriſh ſet on youth,
And delues the paralels in beauties brow,
Feedes on the rarities of natures truth,
And nothing ﬅands but for his ſieth to mow.
And yet to times in hope, my verſe ſhall ﬅand
Praiſing thy worth, diſpight his cruell hand.

::LXI::
IS it thy wil, thy Image ſhould keepe open
My heauy eielids to the weary night?
Doﬅ thou deſire my ſlumbers ſhould be broken,
While ſhadowes like to thee do mocke my ſight?
Is it thy ſpirit that thou ſend'ﬅ from thee
So farre from home into my deeds to prye,
To ﬁnd out ſhames and idle houres in me,
The skope and tenure of thy Ielouſie?
O no, thy loue though much, is not ſo great,
It is my loue that keepes mine eie awake,
Mine owne true loue that doth my reﬅ defeat,
To plaie the watch-man euer for thy ſake.
For thee watch I, whilﬅ thou doﬅ wake elſewhere,
From me farre of , with others all to neere.

::LXII::
SInne of ſelfe-loue poſſeſſeth al mine eie,
And all my ſoule, and al my euery part;
And for this ſinne there is no remedie,
It is ſo grounded inward in my heart.
Me thinkes no face ſo gratious is as mine,
No ſhape ſo true, no truth of ſuch account,
And for my ſelfe mine owne worth do deﬁne,
As I all other in all worths ſurmount.
But when my glaſſe ſhewes me my ſelfe indeed
Beated and chopt with tand antiquitie,
Mine owne ſelfe loue quite contrary I read
Selfe, ſo ſelfe louing were iniquity,
T'is thee(my ſelfe)that for my ſelfe I praiſe,
Painting my age with beauty of thy daies,

::LXIII::
AGainﬅ my loue ſhall be as I am now
With times iniurious hand chruſht and ore-worne,
When houres haue dreind his blood and ﬁld his brow
With lines and wrincles, when his youthfull morne
Hath trauaild on to Ages ﬅeepie night,
And all thoſe beauties whereof now he's King
Are vaniſhing, or vaniſht out of ſight,
Stealing away the treaſure of his Spring.
For ſuch a time do I now fortiﬁe
Againﬅ confounding Ages cruell knife,
That he ſhall neuer cut from memory
My ſweet loues beauty, though my louers life.
His beautie ſhall in theſe blacke lines be ſeene,
And they ſhall liue , and he in them ﬅill greene.

::LXIV::
VVHen I haue ſeene by times fell hand defaced
The rich proud coﬅ of outworne buried age,
When ſometime loftie towers I ſee downe raſed,
And braſſe eternall ſlaue to mortall rage.
When I haue ſeene the hungry Ocean gaine
Aduantage on the Kingdome of the ſhoare,
And the ﬁrme ſoile win of the watry maine,
Increaſing ﬅore with loſſe, and loſſe with ﬅore.
When I haue ſeene ſuch interchange of ﬅate,
Or ﬅate it ſelfe confounded, to decay,
Ruine hath taught me thus to ruminate
That Time will come and take my loue away.
This thought is as a death which cannot chooſe
But weepe to haue, that which it feares to looſe.

::LXV::
SInce braſſe, nor ﬅone, nor earth, nor boundleſſe ſea,
But ſad mortallity ore-ſwaies their power,
How with this rage ſhall beautie hold a plea,
Whoſe action is no ﬅronger then a ﬂower?
O how ſhall ſummers hunny breath hold out,
Againﬅ the wrackfull ſiedge of battring dayes,
When rocks impregnable are not ſo ﬅoute ,
Nor gates of ﬅeele ſo ﬅrong but time decayes?
O fearefull meditation, where alack,
Shall times beﬅ Iewell from times cheﬅ lie hid?
Or what ﬅrong hand can hold his ſwift foote back,
Or who his ſpoile or beautie can forbid?
O none, vnleſſe this miracle haue might,
That in black inck my loue may ﬅill ſhine bright.

::LXVI::
TYr'd with all theſe for reﬅfull death I cry,
As to behold deſert a begger borne,
And needie Nothing trimd in iollitie,
And pureﬅ faith vnhappily forſworne,
And gilded honor ſhamefully miſplaﬅ,
And maiden vertue rudely ﬅrumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully diſgrac'd,
And ﬅrength by limping ſway diſabled ,
And arte made tung-tide by authoritie,
And Folly (Doctor-like) controuling skill,
And ſimple-Truth miſcalde Simplicitie,
And captiue-good attending Captaine ill.
Tyr'd with all theſe, from theſe would I be gone,
Saue that to dye, I leaue my loue alone.

::LXVII::
AH wherefore with infection ſhould he liue,
And with his preſence grace impietie,
That ſinne by him aduantage ſhould atchiue,
And lace it ſelfe with his ſocietie ?
Why ſhould falſe painting immitate his cheeke,
And ﬅeale dead ſeeing of his liuing hew?
Why ſhould poore beautie indirectly ſeeke,
Roſes of ſhaddow, ſince his Roſe is true?
Why ſhould he liue, now nature banckrout is,
Beggerd of blood to bluſh through liuely vaines,
For ſhe hath no exchecker now but his,
And proud of many, liues vpon his gaines?
O him ſhe ﬅores, to ſhow what welth ſhe had,
In daies long ſince, before theſe laﬅ ſo bad.

::LXVIII::
THus is his cheeke the map of daies out-worne,
When beauty liu'd and dy'ed as ﬂowers do now,
Before theſe baﬅard ſignes of faire were borne,
Or durﬅ inhabit on a liuing brow:
Before the goulden treſſes of the dead,
The right of ſepulchers, were ſhorne away,
To liue a ſcond life on ſecond head,
Ere beauties dead ﬂeece made another gay:
In him thoſe holy antique howers are ſeene,
Without all ornament, it ſelfe and true,
Making no ſummer of an others greene,
Robbing no ould to dreſſe his beauty new,
And him as for a map doth Nature ﬅore,
To ſhew faulſe Art what beauty was of yore.

::LXIX::
THoſe parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
All toungs(the voice of ſoules)giue thee that end,
Vttring bare truth, euen ſo as foes Commend.
Their outward thus with outward praiſe is crownd,
But thoſe ſame toungs that giue thee ſo thine owne,
In other accents doe this praiſe confound
By ſeeing farther then the eye hath ſhowne.
They looke into the beauty of thy mind,
And that in gueſſe they meaſure by thy deeds,
Then churls their thoughts(although their eies were kind)
To thy faire ﬂower ad the rancke ſmell of weeds,
But why thy odor matcheth not thy ſhow,
The ſolye is this, that thou doeﬅ common grow.

::LXX::
THat thou are blam'd ſhall not be thy defect,
For ſlanders marke was euer yet the faire,
The ornament of beauty is ſuſpect,
A Crow that ﬂies in heauens ſweeteﬅ ayre.
So thou be good, ſlander doth but approue,
Their worth the greater beeing woo'd of time,
For Canker vice the ſweeteﬅ buds doth loue,
And thou preſent'ﬅ a pure vnﬅayined prime.
Thou haﬅ paﬅ by the ambuſh of young daies,
Either not aſſayld, or victor beeing charg'd,
Yet this thy praiſe cannot be ſoe thy praiſe,
To tye vp enuy, euermore inlarged,
If ſome ſuſpect of ill maskt not thy ſhow,
Then thou alone kingdomes of hearts ſhouldﬅ owe.

::LXXI::
NOe Longer mourne for me when I am dead,
Then you ſhall heare the ſurly ſullen bell
Giue warning to the world that I am ﬂed
From this vile world with vildeﬅ wormes to dwell:
Nay if you read this line, remember not,
The hand that writ it, for I loue you ſo,
That I in your ſweet thoughts would be forgot,
If thinking on me then ſhould make you woe.
O if(I ſay)you looke vpon this verſe,
When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay,
Do not ſo much as my poore name reherſe;
But let your loue euen with my life decay.
Leaﬅ the wiſe world ſhould looke into your mone,
And mocke you with me after I am gon.

::LXXII::
O Leaﬅ the world ſhould taske you to recite,
What merit liu'd in me that you ſhould loue
After my death(deare loue)for get me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy proue.
Vnleſſe you would deuiſe ſome vertuous lye,
To doe more for me then mine owne deſert,
And hang more praiſe vpon deceaſed I,
Then nigard truth would willingly impart:
O leaﬅ your true loue may ſeeme falce in this,
That you for loue ſpeake well of me vntrue,
My name be buried where my body is,
And liue no more to ſhame nor me, nor you.
For I am ſhamd by that which I bring forth,
And ſo ſhould you, to loue things nothing worth.

::LXXIII::
THat time of yeeare thou maiﬅ in me behold,
When yellow leaues, or none, or few doe hange
Vpon thoſe boughes which ſhake againﬅ the could,
Bare rn'wd quiers, where late the ſweet birds ſang.
In me thou ſeeﬅ the twi-light of ſuch day,
As after Sun-ſet fadeth in the Weﬅ,
Which by and by blacke night doth take away,
Deaths ſecond ſelfe that ſeals vp all in reﬅ.
In me thou ſeeﬅ the glowing of ſuch ﬁre,
That on the aſhes of his youth doth lye,
As the death bed, whereon it muﬅ expire,
Conſum'd with that which it was nurriſht by.
This thou perceu'ﬅ, which makes thy loue more ﬅrong,
To loue that well, which thou muﬅ leaue ere long.

::LXXIV::
BVt be contented when that fell areﬅ,
With out all bayle ſhall carry me away,
My life hath in this line ſome intereﬅ,
Which for memoriall ﬅill with thee ſhall ﬅay.
When thou reueweﬅ this, thou doeﬅ reuew,
The very part was conſecrate to thee,
The earth can haue but earth, which is his due,
My ſpirit is thine the better part of me,
So then thou haﬅ but loﬅ the dregs of life,
The pray of wormes, my body being dead,
The coward conqueﬅ of a wretches knife,
To baſe of thee to be remembred,
The worth of that, is that which it containes,
And that is this, and this with thee remaines.

::LXXV::
SO are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as ſweet ſeaſon'd ſhewers are to the ground;
And for the peace of you I hold ſuch ﬅrife,
As twixt a miſer and his wealth is found.
Now proud as an inioyer, and anon
Doubting the ﬁlching age will ﬅeale his treaſure,
Now counting beﬅ to be with you alone,
Then betterd that the world may ſee my pleaſure,
Some-time all ful with feaﬅing on your ſight,
And by and by cleane ﬅarued for a looke,
Poſſeſſing or purſuing no delight
Saue what is had, or muﬅ from you be tooke.
Thus do I pine and ſurfet day by day,
Or gluttoning on all, or all away,

::LXXVI::
VVHy is my verſe ſo barren of new pride?
So far from variation or quicke change?
Why with the time do I not glance aſide
To new found methods, and to compounds ﬅrange?
Why write I ﬅill all one, euer the ſame,
And keepe inuention in a noted weed,
That euery word doth almoﬅ fel my name,
Shewing their birth, and where they did proceed proceed
O know ſweet loue I alwaies write of you,
And you and loue are ﬅill my argument:
So all my beﬅ is dreſſing old words new,
Spending againe what is already ſpent:
For as the Sun is daily new and old,
So is my loue ﬅill telling what is told,

::LXXVII::
THy glaſſe will ſhew thee how thy beauties were,
Thy dyall how thy pretious mynuits waﬅe,
The vacant leaues thy mindes imprint will beare,
And of this booke, this learning maiﬅ thou taﬅe.
The wrinckles which thy glaſſe will truly ſhow,
Of mouthed graues will giue thee memorie,
Thou by thy dyals ſhady ﬅealth maiﬅ know,
Times theeuiſh progreſſe to eternitie.
Looke what thy memorie cannot containe,
Commit to theſe waﬅe blacks, and thou ſhalt ﬁnde
Thoſe children nurﬅ, deliuerd from thy braine,
To take a new acquaintance of thy minde.
Theſe oﬃces, ſo oft as thou wilt looke,
Shall proﬁt thee, and much inrich thy booke.

::LXXVIII::
SO oft haue I inuok'd thee for my Muſe,
And found ſuch faire aſſiﬅance in my verſe,
As euery Alien pen hath got my vſe,
And vnder thee their poeſie diſperſe.
Thine eyes, that taught the dumbe on high to ſing,
And heauie ignorance aloft to ﬂie,
Haue added fethers to the learneds wing,
And giuen grace a double Maieﬅie.
Yet be moﬅ proud of that which I compile,
Whoſe inﬂuence is thine, and borne of thee,
In others workes thou dooﬅ but mend the ﬅile,
And Arts with thy ſweete graces graced be.
But thou art all my art, and dooﬅ aduance
As high as learning, my rude ignorance.

::LXXIX::
WHilﬅ I alone did call vpon thy ayde,
My verſe alone had all thy gentle grace,
But now my gracious numbers are decayde,
And my ſick Muſe doth giue an other place.
I grant ( ſweet loue )thy louely argument
Deſerues the trauaile of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy Poet doth inuent,
He robs thee of, and payes it thee againe,
He lends thee vertue, and he ﬅole that word,
From thy behauiour, beautie doth he giue
And found it in thy cheeke: he can aﬀoord
No praiſe to thee, but what in thee doth liue.
Then thanke him not for that which he doth ſay,
Since what he owes thee, thou thy ſelfe dooﬅ pay,

::LXXX::
O How I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better ſpirit doth vſe your name,
And in the praiſe thereof ſpends all his might,
To make me toung-tide ſpeaking of your fame.
But ſince your worth(wide as the Ocean is)
The humble as the proudeﬅ ſaile doth beare,
My ſawſie barke(inferior farre to his)
On your broad maine doth wilfully appeare.
Your ſhalloweﬅ helpe will hold me vp a ﬂoate,
Whilﬅ he vpon your ſoundleſſe deepe doth ride,
Or ( being wrackt ) I am a worthleſſe bote,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride.
Then If he thriue and I be caﬅ away,
The worﬅ was this, my loue was my decay.

::LXXXI::
OR I ſhall liue your Epitaph to make,
Or you ſuruiue when I in earth am rotten,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortall life ſhall haue,
Though I ( once gone) to all the world muﬅ dye,
The earth can yeeld me but a common graue,
When you intombed in mens eyes ſhall lye,
Your monument ſhall be my gentle verſe,
Which eyes not yet created ſhall ore-read,
And toungs to be, your beeing ſhall rehearſe,
When all the breathers of this world are dead,
You ﬅill ſhall liue (ſuch vertue hath my Pen)
Where breath moﬅ breaths, euen in the mouths of men.

::LXXXII::
I Grant thou wert not married to my Muſe,
And therefore maieﬅ without attaint ore-looke
The dedicated words which writers vſe
Of their faire ſubiect, bleſſing euery booke.
Thou art as faire in knowledge as in hew,
Finding thy worth a limmit paﬅ my praiſe,
And therefore art inforc'd to ſeeke anew,
Some freſher ﬅampe of the time bettering dayes.
And do ſo loue, yet when they haue deuiſde,
What ﬅrained touches Rhethorick can lend,
Thou truly faire, wert truly ſimpathizde,
In true plaine words, by thy true telling friend.
And their groſſe painting might be better vſ'd,
Where cheekes need blood, in thee it is abuſ'd.

::LXXXIII::
I Neuer ſaw that you did painting need,
And therefore to your faire no painting ſet,
I found( or thought I found) you did exceed,
The barren tender of a Poets debt:
And therefore haue I ſlept in your report,
That you your ſelfe being extant well might ſhow,
How farre a moderne quill doth come to ſhort,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow,
This ſilence for my ſinne you did impute,
Which ſhall be moﬅ my glory being dombe,
For I impaire not beautie being mute,
When others would giue life, and bring a tombe.
There liues more life in one of your faire eyes,
Then both your Poets can in praiſe deuiſe.

::LXXXIV::
WHo is it that ſayes moﬅ, which can ſay more,
Then this rich praiſe, that you alone, are you,
In whoſe conﬁne immured is the ﬅore,
Which ſhould example where your equall grew,
Leane penurie within that Pen doth dwell,
That to his ſubiect lends not ſome ſmall glory,
But he that writes of you, if he can tell,
That you are you, ſo digniﬁes his ﬅory.
Let him but coppy what in you is writ,
Not making worſe what nature made ſo cleere,
And ſuch a counter-part ſhall fame his wit,
Making his ﬅile admired euery where.
You to your beautious bleſſings adde a curſe,
Being fond on praiſe, which makes your praiſes worſe.

::LXXXV::
MY toung-tide Muſe in manners holds her ﬅill,
While comments of your praiſe richly compil'd,
Reſerue their Character with goulden quill,
And precious phraſe by all the Muſes ﬁl'd.
I thinke good thoughts, whilﬅ other write good wordes,
And like vnlettered clarke ﬅill crie Amen,
To euery Himne that able ſpirit aﬀords,
In poliſht forme of well reﬁned pen.
Hearing you praiſd, I ſay 'tis ſo, 'tis true,
And to the moﬅ of praiſe adde ſome-thing more,
But that is in my thought, whoſe loue to you
(Though words come hind-moﬅ)holds his ranke before,
Then others, for the breath of words reſpect,
Me for my dombe thoughts, ſpeaking in eﬀect.

::LXXXVI::
VVAs it the proud full ſaile of his great verſe,
Bound for the prize of (all to precious) you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my braine inhearce,
Making their tombe the wombe wherein they grew?
Was it his ſpirit, by ſpirits taught to write,
Aboue a mortall pitch, that ﬅruck me dead ?
No, neither he, nor his compiers by night
Giuing him ayde, my verſe aﬅoniſhed.
He nor that aﬀable familiar ghoﬅ
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
As victors of my ſilence cannot boaﬅ,
I was not ſick of any feare from thence.
But when your countinance ﬁld vp his line,
Then lackt I matter, that infeebled mine.

::LXXXVII::
FArewell thou art too deare for my poſſeſſing,
And like enough thou knowﬅ thy eﬅimate,
The Charter of thy worth giues thee releaſing:
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
And for that ritches where is my deſeruing?
The cauſe of this faire guift in me is wanting,
And ſo my pattent back againe is ſweruing.
Thy ſelfe thou gau'ﬅ, thy owne worth then not knowing,
Or mee to whom thou gau'ﬅ it, elſe miﬅaking,
So thy great guift vpon miſpriſion growing,
Comes home againe, on better iudgement making.
Thus haue I had thee as a dreame doth ﬂatter,
In ſleepe a King, but waking no ſuch matter.

::LXXXVIII::
VVHen thou ſhalt be diſpode to ſet me light,
And place my merrit in the eie of skorne,
Vpon thy ſide, againﬅ my ſelfe ile ﬁght,
And proue thee virtuous, though thou art forſworne:
With mine owne weakeneſſe being beﬅ acquainted,
Vpon thy part I can ſet downe a ﬅory
Of faults conceald, wherein I am attainted:
That thou in looſing me ſhall win much glory:
And I by this wil be a gainer too,
For bending all my louing thoughts on thee,
The iniuries that to my ſelfe I doe,
Doing thee vantage, duble vantage me.
Such is my loue, to thee I ſo belong,
That for thy right, my ſelfe will beare all wrong.

::LXXXIX::
SAy that thou didﬅ forſake mee for ſome falt,
And I will comment vpon that oﬀence,
Speake of my lameneſſe, and I ﬅraight will halt:
Againﬅ thy reaſons making no defence.
Thou canﬅ not(loue)diſgrace me halfe ſo ill,
To ſet a forme vpon deſired change,
As ile my ſelfe diſgrace, knowing thy wil,
I will acquaintance ﬅrangle and looke ﬅrange:
Be abſent from thy walkes and in my tongue,
Thy ſweet beloued name no more ſhall dwell,
Leaﬅ I (too much prophane) ſhould do it wronge:
And haplie of our old acquaintance tell.
For thee, againﬅ my ſelfe ile vow debate,
For I muﬅ nere loue him whom thou doﬅ hate.

::XC::
THen hate me when thou wilt, if euer, now,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to croſſe,
Ioyne with the ſpight of fortune, make me bow,
And doe not drop in for an after loſſe:
Ah doe not, when my heart hath ſcapte this ſorrow,
Come in the rereward of a conquerd woe,
Giue not a windy night a rainie morrow,
To linger out a purpoſd ouer-throw.
If thou wilt leaue me, do not leaue me laﬅ,
When other pettie griefes haue done their ſpight,
But in the onſet come, ſo ﬅall I taﬅe
At ﬁrﬅ the very worﬅ of fortunes might.
And other ﬅraines of woe, which now ſeeme woe,
Compar'd with loſſe of thee, will not ſeeme ſo.

::XCI::
SOme glory in their birth, ſome in their skill,
Some in their wealth, ſome in their bodies force,
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill:
Some in their Hawkes and Hounds, ſome in their Horſe.
And euery humor hath his adiunct pleaſure,
Wherein it ﬁndes a ioy aboue the reﬅ,
But theſe perticulers are not my meaſure,
All theſe I better in one generall beﬅ.
Thy loue is bitter then high birth to me,
Richer then wealth, prouder then garments coﬅ,
Of more delight then Hawkes or Horſes bee:
And hauing thee, of all mens pride I boaﬅ.
Wretched in this alone, that thou maiﬅ take,
All this away, and me moﬅ wretched make.

::XCII::
BVt doe thy worﬅ to ﬅeale thy ſelfe away,
For tearme of life thou art aſſured mine,
And life no longer then thy loue will ﬅay,
For it depends vpon that loue of thine.
Then need I not to feare the worﬅ of wrongs,
When in the leaﬅ of them my life hath end,
I ſee, a better ﬅate to me belongs
Then that, which on thy humor doth depend.
Thou canﬅ not vex me with inconﬅant minde,
Since that my life on thy reuolt doth lie,
Oh what a happy title do I ﬁnde ,
Happy to haue thy loue, happy to die!
But whats ſo bleſſed faire that feares no blot,
Thou maiﬅ be falce, and yet I know it not.

::XCIII::
SO ſhall I liue, ſuppoſing thou art true,
Like a deceiued husband, ſo loues face,
May ﬅill ſeeme loue to me, though alter'd new:
Thy lookes with me, thy heart in other place.
For their can liue no hatred in thine eye,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
In manies lookes, the falce hearts hiﬅory
Is writ in moods and frounes and wrinckles ﬅrange.
But heauen in thy creation did decree,
That in thy face ſweet loue ſhould euer dwell,
What ere thy thoughts, or thy hearts workings be,
Thy lookes ſhould nothing thence, but ſweetneſſe tell.
How like Eaues apple doth thy beauty grow,
If thy ſweet vertue anſwere not thy ſhow.

::XCIV::
THey that haue powre to hurt, and will doe none,
That doe not do the thing, they moﬅ do ſhowe,
Who mouing others, are themſelues as ﬅone,
Vnmooued, could, and to temptation ſlow:
They rightly do inherrit heauens graces,
And husband natures ritches from expence,
They are the Lords and owners of their faces,
Others, but ﬅewards of their excellence:
The ſommers ﬂowre is to the ſommer ſweet,
Though to it ſelfe, it onely liue and die,
But if that ﬂowre with baſe infection meete,
The baſeﬅ weed out-braues his dignity:
For ſweeteﬅ things turne ſowreﬅ by their deedes,
Lillies that feﬅer, ſmell far worſe then weeds.

::XCV::
HOw ſweet and louely doﬅ thou make the ſhame,
Which like a canker in the fragrant Roſe,
Doth ſpot the beautie of thy budding name?
Oh in what ſweets doeﬅ thou thy ſinnes incloſe!
That tongue that tells the ﬅory of thy daies,
(Making laſciuious comments on thy ſport)
Cannot diſpraiſe, but in a kinde of praiſe,
Naming thy name, bleſſes an ill report.
Oh what a manſion haue thoſe vices got,
Which for their habitation choſe out thee,
Where beauties vaile doth couer euery blot,
And all things turnes to faire, that eies can ſee!
Take heed(deare heart)of this large priuiledge,
The hardeﬅ knife ill vſ'd doth looſe his edge.

::XCVI::
SOme ſay thy fault is youth, ſome wantoneſſe,
Some ſay thy grace is youth and gentle ſport,
Both grace and faults are lou'd of more and leſſe:
Thou makﬅ faults graces, that to thee reſort:
As on the ﬁnger of a throned Queene,
The baſeﬅ Iewell wil be well eﬅeem'd:
So are thoſe errors that in thee are ſeene,
To truths tranſlated, and for true things deem'd.
How many Lambs might the ﬅerne Wolfe betray,
If like a Lambe he could his lookes tranſlate.
How many gazers mighﬅ thou lead away,
If thou wouldﬅ vſe the ﬅrength of all thy ﬅate?
But doe not ſo, I loue thee in ſuch ſort,
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

::XCVII::
HOw like a Winter hath my abſence beene
From thee, the pleaſure of the ﬂeeting yeare?
What freezings haue I felt, what darke daies ſeene?
What old Decembers bareneſſe euery where?
And yet this time remou'd was ſommers time,
The teeming Autumne big with ritch increaſe,
Bearing the wanton burthen of the prime,
Like widdowed wombes after their Lords deceaſe:
Yet this aboundant iſſue ſeem'd to me,
But hope of Orphans, and vn-fathered fruite,
For Sommer and his pleaſures waite on thee,
And thou away, the very birds are mute.
Or if they ſing, tis with ſo dull a cheere,
That leaues looke pale, dreading the Winters neere.

::XCVIII::
FRom you haue I beene abſent in the ſpring,
When proud pide Aprill (dreﬅ in all his trim)
Hath put a ſpirit of youth in euery thing:
That heauie Saturne laught and leapt with him.
Yet nor the laies of birds, nor the ſweet ſmell
Of diﬀerent ﬂowers in odor and in hew,
Could make me any ſummers ﬅory tell:
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
Nor did I wonder at the Lillies white,
Nor praiſe the deepe vermillion in the Roſe,
They weare but ſweet, but ﬁgures of delight:
Drawne after you, you patterne of all thoſe.
Yet ſeem'd it Winter ﬅill, and you away,
As with your ſhaddow I with theſe did play.

::XCIX::
THe forward violet thus did I chide,
Sweet theefe whence didﬅ thou ﬅeale thy ſweet that ſmels
If not from my loues breath, the purple pride,
Which on thy ſoft cheeke for complexion dwells?
In my loues veines thou haﬅ too groſely died,
The Lillie I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marierom had ﬅolne thy haire,
The Roſes fearefully on thornes did ﬅand,
Our bluſhing ſhame, an other white diſpaire:
A third nor red, nor white, had ﬅolne of both,
And to his robbry had annext thy breath,
But for his theft in pride of all his growth
A vengfull canker eate him vp to death.
More ﬂowers I noted, yet I none could ſee,

::C::
But ſweet, or culler it had ﬅolne from thee.
VVHere art thou Muſe that thou forgetﬅ ſo long,
To ſpeake of that which giues thee all thy might?
Spendﬅ thou thy furie on ſome worthleſſe ſonge,
Darkning thy powre to lend baſe ſubiects light.
Returne forgetfull Muſe, and ﬅraight redeeme,
In gentle numbers time ſo idely ſpent,
Sing to the eare that doth thy laies eﬅeeme,
And giues thy pen both skill and argument.
Riſe reﬅy Muſe, my loues ſweet face ſuruay,
If time haue any wrincle grauen there,
If any, be a Satire to decay,
And make times ſpoiles diſpiſed euery where.
Giue my loue fame faﬅer then time waﬅs life,

::CI::
So thou preuenﬅ his ſieth, and crooked knife.
OH truant Muſe what ſhalbe thy amends,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty di'd?
Both truth and beauty on my loue depends:
So doﬅ thou too, and therein digniﬁ'd:
Make anſwere Muſe, wilt thou not haply ſaie,
Truth needs no collour with his collour ﬁxt,
Beautie no penſell, beauties truth to lay:
But beﬅ is beﬅ, if neuer intermixt.
Becauſe he needs no praiſe, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuſe not ſilence ſo, for't lies in thee,
To make him much out-liue a gilded tombe:
And to be praiſd of ages yet to be.
Then do thy oﬃce Muſe, I teach thee how,

::CII::
To make him ſeeme long hence, as he ſhowes now.
MY loue is ﬅrengthned though more weake in ſee-ming
I loue not leſſe, thogh leſſe the ſhow appeare,
That loue is marchandiz'd, whoſe ritch eﬅeeming,
The owners tongue doth publiſh euery where.
Our loue was new, and then but in the ſpring,
When I was wont to greet it with my laies,
As Philomell in ſummers front doth ſinge,
And ﬅops his pipe in growth of riper daies:
Not that the ſummer is leſſe pleaſant now
Then when her mournefull himns did huſh the night,
But that wild muſick burthens euery bow,
And ſweets growne common looſe their deare delight.
Therefore like her, I ſome-time hold my tongue:

::CIII::
Becauſe I would not dull you with my ſonge.
ALack what pouerty my Muſe brings forth,
That hauing ſuch a skope to ſhow her pride,
The argument all bare is of more worth
Then when it hath my added praiſe beſide.
Oh blame me not if I no more can write!
Looke in your glaſſe and there appeares a face,
That ouer-goes my blunt inuention quite,
Dulling my lines, and doing me diſgrace.
Were it not ſinfull then ﬅriuing to mend,
To marre the ſubiect that before was well,
For to no other paſſe my verſes tend,
Then of your graces and your gifts to tell.
And more, much more then in my verſe can ſit,

::CIV::
Your owne glaſſe ſhowes you, when you looke in it.
TO me faire friend you neuer can be old,
For as you were when ﬁrﬅ your eye I eyde,
Such ſeemes your beautie ﬅill:Three Winters colde,
Haue from the forreﬅs ſhooke three ſummers pride,
Three beautious ſprings to yellow Autumne turn'd,
In proceſſe of the ſeaſons haue I ſeene,
Three Aprill perfumes in three hot Iunes burn'd,
Since ﬁrﬅ I ſaw you freſh which yet are greene.
Ah yet doth beauty like a Dyall hand,
Steale from his ﬁgure, and no pace perceiu'd,
So your ſweete hew, which me thinkes ﬅill doth ﬅand
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceaued.
For feare of which, heare this thou age vnbred,

::CV::
Ere you were borne was beauties ſummer dead.
LEt not my loue be cal'd Idolatrie,
Nor my beloued as an Idoll ſhow,
Since all alike my ſongs and praiſes be
To one, of one, ﬅill ſuch, and euer ſo.
Kinde is my loue to day, to morrow kinde,
Still conﬅant in a wondrous excellence,
Therefore my verſe to conﬅancie conﬁn'de,
One thing expreſſing, leaues out diﬀerence.
Faire, kinde, and true, is all my argument,
Faire, kinde and true, varrying to other words,
And in this change is my inuention ſpent,
Three theams in one, which wondrous ſcope aﬀords.
Faire, kinde, and true, haue often liu'd alone.

::CVI::
Which three till now, neuer kept ſeate in one.
WHen in the Chronicle of waﬅed time,
I ſee diſcriptions of the faireﬅ wights,
And beautie making beautifull old rime,
In praiſe of Ladies dead, and louely Knights,
Then in the blazon of ſweet beauties beﬅ,
Of hand, of foote, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I ſee their antique Pen would haue expreﬅ,
Euen ſuch a beauty as you maiﬅer now.
So all their praiſes are but propheſies
Of this our time, all you preﬁguring,
And for they look'd but with deuining eyes,
They had not ﬅill enough your worth to ſing :
For we which now behold theſe preſent dayes,

::CVII::
Haue eyes to wonder, but lack toungs to praiſe.
NOt mine owne feares, nor the prophetick ſoule,
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
Can yet the leaſe of my true loue controule,
Suppoſde as forfeit to a conﬁn'd doome.
The mortall Moone hath her eclipſe indur'de,
And the ſad Augurs mock their owne preſage,
Incertenties now crowne them-ſelues aſſur'de,
And peace proclaimes Oliues of endleſſe age,
Now with the drops of this moﬅ balmie time,
My loue lookes freſh, and death to me ſubſcribes,
Since ſpight of him Ile liue in this poore rime,
While he inſults ore dull and ſpeachleſſe tribes.
And thou in this ſhalt ﬁnde thy monument,

::CVIII::
When tyrants creﬅs and tombs of braſſe are ſpent.
VVHat's in the braine that Inck may character ,
Which hath not ﬁgur'd to thee my true ſpirit,
What's new to ſpeake, what now to regiﬅer,
That may expreſſe my loue, or thy deare merit ?
Nothing ſweet boy, but yet like prayers diuine,
I muﬅ each day ſay ore the very ſame,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
Euen as when ﬁrﬅ I hallowed thy faire name.
So that eternall loue in loues freſh caſe,
Waighes not the duﬅ and iniury of age,
Nor giues to neceſſary wrinckles place,
But makes antiquitie for aye his page,
Finding the ﬁrﬅ conceit of loue there bred,

::CIX::
Where time and outward forme would ſhew it dead,
O Neuer ſay that I was falſe of heart,
Though abſence ſeem'd my ﬂame to qualliﬁe,
As eaſie might I from my ſelfe depart,
As from my ſoule which in thy breﬅ doth lye :
That is my home of loue, if I haue rang'd,
Like him that trauels I returne againe,
Iuﬅ to the time, not with the time exchang'd,
So that my ſelfe bring water for my ﬅaine,
Neuer beleeue though in my nature raign'd,
All frailties that beſiege all kindes of blood,
That it could ſo prepoﬅerouſlie be ﬅain'd,
To leaue for nothing all thy ſumme of good :
For nothing this wide Vniuerſe I call,

::CX::
Saue thou my Roſe, in it thou art my all.
ALas 'tis true, I haue gone here and there,
And made my ſelfe a motley to the view,
Gor'd mine own thoughts, ſold cheap what is moﬅ deare,
Made old oﬀences of aﬀections new.
Moﬅ true it is, that I haue lookt on truth
Aſconce and ﬅrangely: But by all aboue,
Theſe blenches gaue my heart an other youth,
And worſe eſſaies prou'd thee my beﬅ of loue,
Now all is done, haue what ſhall haue no end,
Mine appetite I neuer more will grin'de
On newer proofe, to trie an older friend,
A God in loue, to whom I am conﬁn'd.
Then giue me welcome, next my heauen the beﬅ,

::CXI::
Euen to thy pure and moﬅ moﬅ louing breﬅ.
O For my ſake doe you wiſh fortune chide,
The guiltie goddeſſe of my harmfull deeds,
That did not better for my life prouide,
Then publick meanes which publick manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receiues a brand,
And almoﬅ thence my nature is ſubdu'd
To what it workes in, like the Dyers hand,
Pitty me then, and wiſh I were renu'de,
Whilﬅ like a willing pacient I will drinke,
Potions of Eyſell gainﬅ my ﬅrong infection,
No bitterneſſe that I will bitter thinke,
Nor double pennance to correct correction.
Pittie me then deare friend, and I aſſure yee,

::CXII::
Euen that your pittie is enough to cure mee.
YOur loue and pittie doth th'impreſſion ﬁll,
Which vulgar ſcandall ﬅampt vpon my brow,
For what care I who calles me well or ill,
So you ore-greene my bad, my good alow?
You are my All the world, and I muﬅ ﬅriue,
To know my ſhames and praiſes from your tounge,
None elſe to me, nor I to none aliue,
That my ﬅeel'd ſence or changes right or wrong,
In ſo profound Abiſme I throw all care
Of others voyces, that my Adders ſence,
To cryttick and to ﬂatterer ﬅopped are:
Marke how with my neglect I doe diſpence.
You are ſo ﬅrongly in my purpoſe bred,

::CXIII::
That all the world beſides me thinkes y'are dead.
SInce I left you, mine eye is in my minde,
And that which gouernes me to goe about,
Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
Seemes ſeeing, but eﬀectually is out:
For it no forme deliuers to the heart
Of bird, of ﬂowre, or ſhape which it doth lack,
Of his quick obiects hath the minde no part,
Nor his owne viſion houlds what it doth catch:
For if it ſee the rud'ﬅ or gentleﬅ ſight,
The moﬅ ſweet-fauor or deformedﬅ creature,
The mountaine, or the ſea, the day, or night:
The Croe, or Doue, it ſhapes them to your feature.
Incapable of more repleat, with you,

::CXIV::
My moﬅ true minde thus maketh mine vntrue.
OR whether doth my minde being crown'd with you
Drinke vp the monarks plague this ﬂattery ?
Or whether ſhall I ſay mine eie ſaith true,
And that your loue taught it this Alcumie?
To make of monﬅers, and things indigeﬅ,
Such cherubines as your ſweet ſelfe reſemble,
Creating euery bad a perfect beﬅ
As faﬅ as obiects to his beames aſſemble:
Oh tis the ﬁrﬅ, tis ﬂatry in my ſeeing,
And my great minde moﬅ kingly drinkes it vp,
Mine eie well knowes what with his guﬅ is greeing,
And to his pallat doth prepare the cup.
If it be poiſon'd, tis the leſſer ſinne,

::CXV::
That mine eye loues it and doth ﬁrﬅ beginne.
THoſe lines that I before haue writ doe lie,
Euen thoſe that ſaid I could not loue you deerer,
Yet then my iudgement knew no reaſon why,
My moﬅ full ﬂame ſhould afterwards burne cleerer.
But reckening time, whoſe milliond accidents
Creepe in twixt vowes, and change decrees of Kings,
Tan ſacred beautie, blunt the ſharp'ﬅ intents,
Diuert ﬅrong mindes to th'courſe of altring things:
Alas why fearing of times tiranie,
Might I not then ſay now I loue you beﬅ,
When I was certaine ore in-certainty,
Crowning the preſent, doubting of the reﬅ:
Loue is a Babe , then might I not ſay ſo

::CXVI::
To giue full growth to that which ﬅill doth grow.
LEt me not to the marriage of true mindes
Admit impediments, loue is not loue
Which alters when it alteration ﬁndes,
Or bends with the remouer to remoue.
O no, it is an euer ﬁxed marke
That lookes on tempeﬅs and is neuer ſhaken;
It is the ﬅar to euery wandring barke,
Whoſe worths vnknowne, although his higth be taken.
Lou's not Times foole, though roſie lips and cheeks
Within his bending ſickles compaſſe come,
Loue alters not with his breefe houres and weekes,
But beares it out euen to the edge of doome:
If this be error and vpon me proued,

::CXVII::
I neuer writ, nor no man euer loued.
ACcuſe me thus, that I haue ſcanted all,
Wherein I ſhould your great deſerts repay,
Forgot vpon your deareﬅ loue to call,
Whereto al bonds do tie me day by day,
That I haue frequent binne with vnknown mindes,
And giuen to time your owne deare purchaſ'd right,
That I haue hoyﬅed ſaile to al the windes
Which ſhould tranſport me fartheﬅ from your ſight.
Booke both my wilfulneſſe and errors downe,
And on iuﬅ proofe ſurmiſe, accumilate,
Bring me within the leuel of your frowne,
But ſhoote not at me in your wakened hate:
Since my appeale ſaies I did ﬅriue to prooue

::CXVIII::
The conﬅancy and virtue of your loue
LIke as to make our appetites more keene
With eager compounds we our pallat vrge,
As to preuent our malladies vnſeene,
We ſicken to ſhun ſickneſſe when we purge.
Euen ſo being full of your nere cloying ſweetneſſe,
To bitter ſawces did I frame my feeding;
And ſicke of wel-fare found a kind of meetneſſe,
To be diſeaſ'd ere that there was true needing.
Thus pollicie in loue t'anticipate
The ills that were, not grew to faults aſſured,
And brought to medicine a healthfull ﬅate
Which rancke of goodneſſe would by ill be cured.
But thence I learne and ﬁnd the leſſon true,

::CXIX::
Drugs poyſon him that ſo fell ſicke of you.
WHat potions haue I drunke of Syren teares
Diﬅil'd from Lymbecks foule as hell within,
Applying feares to hopes, and hopes to feares,
Still looſing when I ſaw my ſelfe to win?
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Whilﬅ it hath thought it ſelfe ſo bleſſed neuer?
How haue mine eies out of their Spheares bene ﬁtted
In the diﬅraction of this madding feuer?
O beneﬁt of ill, now I ﬁnd true
That better is, by euil ﬅill made better.
And ruin'd loue when it is built anew
Growes fairer then at ﬁrﬅ, more ﬅrong, far greater.
So I returne rebukt to my content,

::CXX::
And gaine by ills thriſe more then I haue ſpent.
THat you were once vnkind be-friends mee now,
And for that ſorrow , which I then didde feele,
Needes muﬅ I vnder my tranſgreſſion bow,
Vnleſſe my Nerues were braſſe or hammered ﬅeele.
For if you were by my vnkindneſſe ſhaken
As I by yours , y'haue paﬅ a hell of Time,
And I a tyrant haue no leaſure taken
To waigh how once I ſuﬀered in your crime.
O that our night of wo might haue remembred
My deepeﬅ ſence, how hard true ſorrow hits,
And ſoone to you, as you to me then tendred
The humble ſalue, which wounded boſomes ﬁts!
But that your treſpaſſe now becomes a fee,

::CXXI::
Mine ranſoms yours, and yours muﬅ ranſome mee.
TIS better to be vile then vile eﬅeemed,
When not to be, receiues reproach of being,
And the iuﬅ pleaſure loﬅ, which is ſo deemed,
Not by our feeling, but by others ſeeing.
For why ſhould others falſe adulterat eyes
Giue ſalutation to my ſportiue blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer ſpies;
Which in their wils count bad what I think good?
Noe, I am that I am, and they that leuell
At my abuſes, reckon vp their owne,
I may be ﬅraight though they them-ſelues be beuel
By their rancke thoughtes, my deedes muﬅ not be ſhown
Vnleſſe this generall euill they maintaine,

::CXXII::
All men are bad and in their badneſſe raigne.
TThy guift, , thy tables, are within my braine
Full characterd with laﬅing memory,
Which ſhall aboue that idle rancke remaine
Beyond all date euen to eternity.
Or at the leaﬅ, ſo long as braine and heart
Haue facultie by nature to ſubſiﬅ,
Til each to raz'd obliuion yeeld his part
Of thee, thy record neuer can be miﬅ:
That poore retention could not ſo much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy deare loue to skore,
Therefore to giue them from me was I bold,
To truﬅ thoſe tables that receaue thee more,
To keepe an adiunckt to remember thee,

::CXXIII::
Were to import forgetfulneſſe in mee.
NO! Time, thou ſhalt not boﬅ that I doe change,
Thy pyramyds buylt vp with newer might
To me are nothing nouell, nothing ﬅrange,
They are but dreſſings of a former ſight:
Our dates are breefe, and therefor we admire,
What thou doﬅ foyﬅ vpon vs that is ould,
And rather make them borne to our deſire,
Then thinke that we before haue heard them tould:
Thy regiﬅers and thee I both deﬁe,
Not wondring at the preſent, nor the paﬅ,
For thy records, and what we ſee doth lye,
Made more or les by thy continuall haﬅ:
This I doe vow and this ſhall euer be,

::CXXIV::
I will be true diſpight thy ſyeth and thee.
YF my deare loue were but the childe of ﬅate,
It might for fortunes baﬅerd be vnfathered,
As ſubiect to times loue, or to times hate,
Weeds among weeds, or ﬂowers with ﬂowers gatherd.
No it was buylded far from accident,
It ſuﬀers not in ſmilinge pomp, nor falls
Vnder the blow of thralled diſcontent,
Whereto th'inuiting time our faſhion calls:
It feares not policy that Heriticke,
Which workes on leaſes of ſhort numbred howers,
But all alone ﬅands hugely pollitick,
That it nor growes with heat, nor drownes with ſhowres.
To this I witnes call the foles of time,

::CXXV::
Which die for goodnes, who haue liu'd for crime.
VVEr't ought to me I bore the canopy,
With my extern the outward honoring,
Or layd great baſes for eternity,
Which proues more ſhort then waﬅ or ruining?
Haue I not ſeene dwellers on forme and fauor
Loſe all, and more by paying too much rent
For compound ſweet;Forgoing ſimple ſauor,
Pittifull thriuors in their gazing ſpent.
Noe, let me be obſequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblacion, poore but free,
Which is not mixt with ſeconds, knows no art,
But mutuall render onely me for thee.
Hence, thou ſubborndInformer, a trew ſoule

::CXXVI::
When moﬅ impeacht, ﬅands leaﬅ in thy controule.
O Thou my louely Boy who in thy power,
Doeﬅ hould times ﬁckle glaſſe, his ﬁckle, hower:
Who haﬅ by wayning growne, and therein ſhou'ﬅ,
Thy louers withering, as thy ſweet ſelfe grow'ﬅ.
If Nature(ſoueraine miﬅeres ouer wrack)
As thou goeﬅ onwards ﬅill will plucke thee backe,
She keepes thee to this purpoſe, that her skill.
May time diſgrace, and wretched mynuit kill.
Yet feare her O thou minnion of her pleaſure,
She may detaine, but not ﬅill keepe her treſure!
Her Audite(though delayd)anſwer'd muﬅ be,
And her Quietus is to render thee.
( )

::CXXVII::
( )
IN the ould age blacke was not counted faire,
Or if it weare it bore not beauties name:
But now is blacke beauties ſucceſſiue heire,
And Beautie ſlanderd with a baﬅard ſhame,
For ſince each hand hath put on Natures power,
Fairing the foule with Arts faulſe borrow'd face,
Sweet beauty hath no name no holy boure,
But is prophan'd, if not liues in diſgrace.
Therefore my Miﬅerſſe eyes are Rauen blacke,
Her eyes ſo ſuted, and they mourners ſeeme,
At ſuch who not borne faire no beauty lack,
Slandring Creation with a falſe eﬅeeme,
Yet ſo they mourne becomming of their woe,

::CXXVIII::
That euery toung ſaies beauty ſhould looke ſo.
HOw oft when thou my muſike muſike playﬅ,
Vpon that bleſſed wood whoſe motion ſounds
With thy ſweet ﬁngers when thou gently ſwayﬅ,
The wiry concord that mine eare confounds,
Do I enuie thoſe Iackes that nimble leape,
To kiſſe the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilﬅ my poore lips which ſhould that harueﬅ reape,
At the woods bouldnes by thee bluſhing ﬅand.
To be ſo tikled they would change their ﬅate,
And ſituation with thoſe dancing chips,
Ore whome their ﬁngers walke with gentle gate,
Making dead wood more bleﬅ then liuing lips,
Since ſauſie Iackes ſo happy are in this,

::CXXIX::
Giue them their ﬁngers, me thy lips to kiſſe.
TH'expence of Spirit in a waﬅe of ſhame
Is luﬅ in action, and till action , luﬅ
Is periurd, murdrous, blouddy full of blame,
Sauage, extreame, rude, cruell, not to truﬅ,
Inioyd no ſooner but diſpiſed ﬅraight,
Paﬅ reaſon hunted, and no ſooner had
Paﬅ reaſon hated as a ſwollowed bayt,
On purpoſe layd to make the taker mad.
Made In purſut and in poſſeſſion ſo,
Had, hauing, and in queﬅ, to haue extreame,
A bliſſe in proofe and proud and very wo,
Before a ioy propoſd behind a dreame,
All this the world well knowes yet none knowes well,

::CXXX::
To ſhun the heauen that leads men to this hell.
MY Miﬅres eyes are nothing like the Sunne,
Currall is farre more red, then her lips red,
If ſnow be white, why then her breﬅs are dun:
If haires be wiers, black wiers grow on her head:
I haue ſeene Roſes damaskt, red and white,
But no ſuch Roſes ſee I in her cheekes,
And in ſome perfumes is there more delight,
Then in the breath that from my Miﬅres reekes.
I loue to heare her ſpeake, yet well I know,
That Muſicke hath a farre more pleaſing ſound:
I graunt I neuer ſaw a goddeſſe goe,
My Miﬅres when ſhee walkes treads on the ground.
And yet by heauen I thinke my loue as rare,

::CXXXI::
As any ſhe beli'd with falſe compare.
THou art as tiranous, ſo as thou art,
As thoſe whoſe beauties proudly make them cruell;
For well thou know'ﬅ to my deare doting hart
Thou art the faireﬅ and moﬅ precious Iewell.
Yet in good faith ſome ſay that thee behold,
Thy face hath not the power to make loue grone;
To ſay they erre, I dare not be ſo bold,
Although I ſweare it to my ſelfe alone.
And to be ſure that is not falſe I ſweare
A thouſand grones but thinking on thy face,
One on anothers necke do witneſſe beare
Thy blacke is faireﬅ in my iudgements place.
In nothing art thou blacke ſaue in thy deeds,

::CXXXII::
And thence this ſlaunder as I thinke proceeds.
THine eies I loue, and they as pittying me,
Knowing thy heart torment me with diſdaine,
Haue put on black, and louing mourners bee,
Looking with pretty ruth vpon my paine.
And truly not the morning Sun of Heauen
Better becomes the gray cheeks of th'Eaﬅ,
Nor that full Starre that vſhers in the Eauen
Doth halfe that glory to the ſober Weﬅ
As thoſe two morning eyes become thy face:
O let it then as well beſeeme thy heart
To mourne for me ſince mourning doth thee grace,
And ſute thy pitty like in euery part.
Then will I ſweare beauty her ſelfe is blacke,

::CXXXIII::
And all they foule that thy complexion lacke.
BEſhrew that heart that makes my heart to groane
For that deepe wound it giues my friend and me;
I'ﬅ not ynough to torture me alone,
But ſlaue to ſlauery my ſweet'ﬅ friend muﬅ be.
Me from my ſelfe thy cruell eye hath taken,
And my next ſelfe thou harder haﬅ ingroſſed,
Of him, my ſelfe, and thee I am forſaken,
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be croſſed :
Priſon my heart in thy ﬅeele boſomes warde,
But then my friends heart let my poore heart bale,
Who ere keepes me, let my heart be his garde,
Thou canﬅ not then vſe rigor in my Iaile.
And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee,

::CXXXIV::
Perforce am thine and all that is in me.
SO now I haue confeﬅ that he is thine,
And I my ſelfe am morgag'd to thy will,
My ſelfe Ile forfeit, ſo that other mine,
Thou wilt reﬅore to be my comfort ﬅill:
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
For thou art couetous, and he is kinde,
He learnd but ſuretie-like to write for me,
Vnder that bond that him as faﬅ doth binde.
The ﬅatute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Thou vſurer that put'ﬅ forth all to vſe,
And ſue a friend, came debter for my ſake,
So him I looſe through my vnkinde abuſe.
Him haue I loﬅ, thou haﬅ both him and me,

::CXXXV::
He paies the whole, and yet am I not free.
WHo euer hath her wiſh, thou haﬅ thy Will,
And Will too boote, and Will in ouer-plus,
More then enough am I that vexe thee ﬅill,
To thy ſweete will making addition thus.
Wilt thou whoſe will is large and ſpatious,
Not once vouchſafe to hide my will in thine,
Shall will in others ſeeme right gracious,
And in my will no faire acceptance ſhine:
The ſea all water, yet receiues raine ﬅill,
And in aboundance addeth to his ﬅore,
So thou beeing rich in Will adde to thy Will,
One will of mine to make thy large Will more.
Let no vnkinde, no faire beſeechers kill,

::CXXXVI::
Thinke all but one, and me in that one Will.
IF thy ſoule check thee that I come ſo neere,
Sweare to thy blind ſoule that I was thy Will,
And will thy ſoule knowes is admitted there,
Thus farre for loue, my loue-ſute ſweet fullﬁll.
Will, will fulﬁll the treaſure of thy loue,
I ﬁll it full with wils, and my will one,
In things of great receit with eaſe we prooue.
Among a number one is reckon'd none.
Then in the number let me paſſe vntold,
Though in thy ﬅores account I one muﬅ be,
For nothing hold me, ſo it pleaſe thee hold,
That nothing me, a ſome-thing ſweet to thee.
Make but my name thy loue, and loue that ﬅill,

::CXXXVII::
And then thou loueﬅ me for my name is Will.
THou blinde foole loue, what dooﬅ thou to mine eyes,
That they behold and ſee not what they ſee :
They know what beautie is, ſee where it lyes,
Yet what the beﬅ is, take the worﬅ to be.
If eyes corrupt by ouer-partiall lookes,
Be anchord in the baye where all men ride,
Why of eyes falſehood haﬅ thou forged hookes,
Whereto the iudgement of my heart is tide ?
Why ſhould my heart thinke that a ſeuerall plot,
Which my heart knowes the wide worlds common place?
Or mine eyes ſeeing this, ſay this is not
To put faire truth vpon ſo foule a face,
In things right true my heart and eyes haue erred,

::CXXXVIII::
And to this falſe plague are they now tranſferred.
WHen my loue ſweares that ſhe is made of truth,
I do beleeue her though I know ſhe lyes,
That ſhe might thinke me ſome vntuterd youth,
Vnlearned in the worlds falſe ſubtilties.
Thus vainely thinking that ſhe thinkes me young,
Although ſhe knowes my dayes are paﬅ the beﬅ,
Simply I credit her falſe ſpeaking tongue,
On both ſides thus is ſimple truth ſuppreﬅ :
But wherefore ſayes ſhe not ſhe is vniuﬅ ?
And wherefore ſay not I that I am old?
O loues beﬅ habit is in ſeeming truﬅ,
And age in loue, loues not t'haue yeares told.
Therefore I lye with her, and ſhe with me,

::CXXXIX::
And in our faults by lyes we ﬂattered be.
O Call not me to iuﬅiﬁe the wrong,
That thy vnkindneſſe layes vpon my heart,
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy toung,
Vſe power with power, and ſlay me not by Art,
Tell me thou lou'ﬅ elſe-where;but in my ſight,
Deare heart forbeare to glance thine eye aſide,
What needﬅ thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more then my ore-preﬅ defence can bide?
Let me excuſe thee, ah my loue well knowes,
Her prettie lookes haue beene mine enemies,
And therefore from my face ſhe turnes my foes,
That they elſe-where might dart their iniuries :
Yet do not ſo, but ſince I am neere ſlaine,

::CXL::
Kill me out-right with lookes, and rid my paine.
BE wiſe as thou art cruell, do not preſſe
My toung-tide patience with too much diſdaine :
Leaﬅ ſorrow lend me words and words expreſſe,
The manner of my pittie wanting paine.
If I might teach thee witte better it weare,
Though not to loue, yet loue to tell me ſo,
As teﬅie ſick-men when their deaths be neere,
No newes but health from their Phiſitions know.
For if I ſhould diſpaire I ſhould grow madde,
And in my madneſſe might ſpeake ill of thee,
Now this ill wreﬅing world is growne ſo bad,
Madde ſlanderers by madde eares beleeued be.
That I may not be ſo, nor thou be lyde,

::CXLI::
Beare thine eyes ﬅraight , though thy proud heart goe wide.
IN faith I doe not loue thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thouſand errors note,
But 'tis my heart that loues what they diſpiſe,
Who in diſpight of view is pleaſd to dote.
Nor are mine eares with thy toungs tune delighted,
Nor tender feeling to baſe touches prone,
Nor taﬅe, nor ſmell, deſire to be inuited
To any ſenſuall feaﬅ with thee alone :
But my ﬁue wits, nor my ﬁue ſences can
Diſwade one fooliſh heart from ſeruing thee,
Who leaues vnſwai'd the likeneſſe of a man,
Thy proud hearts ſlaue and vaſſall wretch to be :
Onely my plague thus farre I count my gaine,

::CXLII::
That ſhe that makes me ſinne, awards me paine.
LOue is my ſinne, and thy deare vertue hate,
Hate of my ſinne, grounded on ſinfull louing,
O but with mine, compare thou thine owne ﬅate ,
And thou ſhalt ﬁnde it merrits not reproouing,
Or if it do , not from thoſe lips of thine,
That haue prophan'd their ſcarlet ornaments,
And ſeald falſe bonds of loue as oft as mine,
Robd others beds reuenues of their rents.
Be it lawfull I loue thee as thou lou'ﬅ thoſe,
Whome thine eyes wooe as mine importune thee,
Roote pittie in thy heart that when it growes,
Thy pitty may deſerue to pittied bee.
If thou dooﬅ ſeeke to haue what thou dooﬅ hide,

::CXLIII::
By ſelfe example mai'ﬅ thou be denide.
LOe as a carefull huſwife runnes to catch,
One of her fethered creatures broake away,
Sets downe her babe and makes all ſwift diſpatch
In purſuit of the thing ſhe would haue ﬅay:
Whilﬅ her neglected child holds her in chace,
Cries to catch her whoſe buſie care is bent,
To follow that which ﬂies before her face:
Not prizing her poore infants diſcontent;
So runﬅ thou after that which ﬂies from thee,
Whilﬅ I thy babe chace thee a farre behind,
But if thou catch thy hope turne back to me:
And play the mothers part kiſſe me, be kind.
So will I pray that thou maiﬅ haue thy Will,

::CXLIV::
If thou turne back and my loude crying ﬅill.
TWo loues I haue of comfort and diſpaire,
Which like two ſpirits do ſugieﬅ me ﬅill,
The better angell is a man right faire:
The worſer ſpirit a woman collour'd il.
To win me ſoone to hell my femall euill,
Tempteth my better angel from my ſight,
And would corrupt my ſaint to be a diuel:
Wooing his purity with her fowle pride.
And whether that my angel be turn'd ﬁnde,
Suſpect I may, yet not directly tell,
But being both from me both to each friend,
I geſſe one angel in an others hel.
Yet this ſhal I nere know but liue in doubt,

::CXLV::
Till my bad angel ﬁre my good one out.
THoſe lips that Loues owne hand did make,
Breath'd forth the ſound that ſaid I hate,
To me that languiſht for her ſake:
But when ſhe ſaw my wofull ﬅate,
Straight in her heart did mercie come,
Chiding that tongue that euer ſweet,
Was vſde in giuing gentle dome:
And tought it thus a new to greete:
I hate ſhe alterd with an end,
That follow'd it as gentle day,
Doth follow night who like a ﬁend
From heauen to hell is ﬂowne away.
I hate, from hate away ſhe threw,

::CXLVI::
And ſau'd my life ſaying not you.
POore ſoule the center of my ſinfull earth,
My ſinfull earth theſe rebbell powres that thee array,
Why doﬅ thou pine within and ſuﬀer dearth
Painting thy outward walls ſo coﬅlie gay?
Why ſo large coﬅ hauing ſo ſhort a leaſe,
Doﬅ thou vpon thy fading manſion ſpend?
Shall wormes inheritors of this exceſſe
Eate vp thy charge? is this thy bodies end?
Then ſoule liue thou vpon thy ſeruants loſſe,
And let that pine to aggrauat thy ﬅore;
Buy tearmes diuine in ſelling houres of droſſe:
Within be fed, without be rich no more,
So ſhalt thou feed on death, that feeds on men,

::CXLVII::
And death once dead, ther's no more dying then.
MY loue is as a feauer longing ﬅill,
For that which longer nurſeth the diſeaſe,
Feeding on that which doth preſerue the ill,
Th'vncertaine ſicklie appetite to pleaſe:
My reaſon the Phiſition to my loue,
Angry that his preſcriptions are not kept
Hath left me, and I deſperate now approoue,
Deſire is death, which Phiſick did except.
Paﬅ cure I am, now Reaſon is paﬅ care,
And frantick madde with euer-more vnreﬅ,
My thoughts and my diſcourſe as mad mens are,
At randon from the truth vainely expreﬅ.
For I haue ſworne thee faire, and thought thee bright,

::CXLVIII::
Who art as black as hell, as darke as night.
O Me ! what eyes hath loue put in my head,
Which haue no correſpondence with true ſight,
Or if they haue, where is my iudgment ﬂed,
That cenſures falſely what they ſee aright ?
If that be faire whereon my falſe eyes dote,
What meanes the world to ſay it is not ſo ?
If it be not, then loue doth well denote,
Loues eye is not ſo true as all mens:no,
How can it ? O how can loues eye be true,
That is ſo vext with watching and with teares?
No maruaile then though I miﬅake my view,
The ſunne it ſelfe ſees not, till heauen cleeres.
O cunning loue, with teares thou keepﬅ me blinde,

::CXLIX::
Leaﬅ eyes well ſeeing thy foule faults ſhould ﬁnde.
CAnﬅ thou O cruell, ſay I loue thee not,
When I againﬅ my ſelfe with thee pertake :
Doe I not thinke on thee when I forgot
Am of my ſelfe, all tirant for thy ſake?
Who hateth thee that I doe call my friend,
On whom froun'ﬅ thou that I doe faune vpon,
Nay if thou lowrﬅ on me doe I not ſpend
Reuenge vpon my ſelfe with preſent mone?
What merrit do I in my ſelfe reſpect,
That is ſo proude thy ſeruice to diſpiſe,
When all my beﬅ doth worſhip thy defect,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes.
But loue hate on for now I know thy minde,

::CL::
Thoſe that can ſee thou lou'ﬅ, and I am blind.
OH from what powre haﬅ thou this powrefull might,
VVith inſuﬃciency my heart to ſway,
To make me giue the lie to my true ſight,
And ſwere that brightneſſe doth not grace the day?
Whence haﬅ thou this becomming of things il,
That in the very refuſe of thy deeds;
There is ſuch ﬅrength and warrantiſe of skill,
That in my minde thy worﬅ all beﬅ exceeds?
Who taught thee how to make me loue thee more,
The more I heare and ſee iuﬅ cauſe of hate,
Oh though I loue what others doe abhor,
VVith others thou ſhouldﬅ not abhor my ﬅate.
If thy vnworthineſſe raiſd loue in me,

::CLI::
More worthy I to be belou'd of thee.
LOue is too young to know what conſcience is,
Yet who knowes not conſcience is borne of loue,
Then gentle cheater vrge not my amiſſe,
Leaﬅ guilty of my faults thy ſweet ſelfe proue.
For thou betraying me, I doe betray
My nobler part to my groſe bodies treaſon,
My ſoule doth tell my body that he may,
Triumph in loue, ﬂeſh ﬅaies no farther reaſon.
But ryſing at thy name doth point out thee,
As his triumphant prize, proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poore drudge to be
To ﬅand in thy aﬀaires, fall by thy ſide.
No want of conſcience hold it that I call,

::CLII::
Her loue, for whoſe deare loue I riſe and fall.
IN louing thee thou know'ﬅ I am forſworne,
But thou art twice forſworne to me loue ſwearing,
In act thy bed-vow broake and new faith torne,
In vowing new hate after new loue bearing:
But why of two othes breach doe I accuſe thee,
When I breake twenty:I am periur'd moﬅ,
For all my vowes are othes but to miſuſe thee:
And all my honeﬅ faith in thee is loﬅ.
For I haue ſworne deepe othes of thy deepe kindneſſe:
Othes of thy loue, thy truth, thy conﬅancie,
And to inlighten thee gaue eyes to blindneſſe,
Or made them ſwere againﬅ the thing they ſee.
For I haue ſworne thee faire:more periurde eye,

::CLIII::
To ſwere againﬅ the truth fo foule a lie.
CVpid laid by his brand and fell a ſleepe,
A maide of Dyans this aduantage found,
And his loue-kindling ﬁre did quickly ﬅeepe
In a could vallie-fountaine of that ground:
Which borrowd from this holie ﬁre of loue,
A dateleſſe liuely heat ﬅill to indure,
And grew a ſeething bath which yet men proue,
Againﬅ ﬅrang malladies a ſoueraigne cure:
But at my miﬅres eie loues brand new ﬁred,
The boy for triall needes would touch my breﬅ,
I ſick withall the helpe of bath deſired,
And thether hied a ſad diﬅemperd gueﬅ.
But found no cure, the bath for my helpe lies,

::CLIV::
Where Cupid got new ﬁre;my miﬅres eye.
THe little Loue-God lying once a ſleepe,
Laid by his ſide his heart inﬂaming brand,
Whilﬅ many Nymphes that vou'd chaﬅ life to keep,
Came tripping by, but in her maiden hand,
The fayreﬅ votary tooke vp that ﬁre,
Which many Legions of true hearts had warm'd,
And ſo the Generall of hot deſire,
Was ſleeping by a Virgin hand diſarm'd.
This brand ſhe quenched in a coole Well by,
Which from loues ﬁre tooke heat perpetuall,
Growing a bath and healthfull remedy,
For men diſeaſd, but I my Miﬅriſſe thrall,
Came there for cure and this by that I proue,

